sustainability is the process of maintaining change in a balanced fashion in which the exploitation of resources the direction of investments the orientation of technological development and institutional change are all in harmony and enhance both current and future potential to meet human needs and aspirations .
for many in the field sustainability is defined through the following interconnected domains or pillars environment economic and social .
subdomains of sustainable development have been considered also cultural technological and political .
while sustainable development may be the organizing principle for sustainability for some for others the two terms are paradoxical ie .
sustainable development is the development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs .
brundtland report for the world commission on environment and development introduced the term of sustainable developmentsustainability can also be defined as a socioecological process characterized by the pursuit of a common ideal .
however by persistently and dynamically approaching it the process results in a sustainable system .
moving towards sustainability is also a social challenge that entails international and national law urban planning and transport local and individual lifestyles and ethical consumerism .
ways of living more sustainably can take many forms from reorganizing living conditions eg ecovillages ecomunicipalities and sustainable cities reappraising economic sectors permaculture green building sustainable agriculture or work practices sustainable architecture using science to develop new technologies green technologies renewable energy and sustainable fission and fusion power or designing systems in a flexible and reversible manner and adjusting individual lifestyles that conserve natural resources .
the term sustainability should be viewed as humanity s target goal of humanecosystem equilibrium homeostasis while sustainable development refers to the holistic approach and temporal processes that lead us to the end point of sustainability .
despite the increased popularity of the use of the term sustainability the possibility that human societies will achieve environmental sustainability has been and continues to be light of environmental degradation climate change overconsumption population growth and societies pursuit of unlimited economic growth in a closed system .
the name sustainability is derived from the latin sustinere tenere to hold sub under .
sustain can mean maintain support or endure .
since the sustainability has been used more in the sense of human sustainability on planet earth and this has resulted in the most widely quoted definition of sustainability as a part of the concept sustainable development that of the brundtland commission of the united nations on march sustainable development is development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs .
the world summit on social development identified sustainable development goals such as economic development social development and environmental protection .
this view has been expressed as an illustration using three overlapping ellipses indicating that the three pillars of sustainability are not mutually exclusive and can be mutually reinforcing .
the three pillars have served as a common ground for numerous sustainability standards and certification systems in recent years in particular in the food industry .
some sustainability experts and practitioners have illustrated four pillars of sustainability or a quadruple bottom line .
one such pillar is future generations which emphasizes the longterm thinking associated with sustainability .
there is also an opinion that considers resource use and financial sustainability as two additional pillars of sustainability .
sustainable development consists of balancing local and global efforts to meet basic human needs without destroying or degrading the natural environment .
the question then becomes how to represent the relationship between those needs and the environmenta study from pointed out that environmental justice is as important as sustainable development .
this perspective led to the nested circles figure of economics inside society inside the environmentthe simple definition that sustainability is something that improves the quality of human life while living within the carrying capacity of supporting ecosystems though vague conveys the idea of sustainability having quantifiable limits .
but sustainability is also a call to action a task in progress or journey and therefore a political process so some definitions set out common goals and values .
the earth charter speaks of a sustainable global society founded on respect for nature universal human rights economic justice and a culture of peace .
this suggested a more complex figure of sustainability which included the importance of the domain of politicsmore than that sustainability implies responsible and proactive decisionmaking and innovation that minimizes negative impact and maintains balance between ecological resilience economic prosperity political justice and cultural vibrancy to ensure a desirable planet for all species now and in the future .
specific types of sustainability include sustainable agriculture sustainable architecture or ecological economics .
understanding sustainable development is important but without clear targets an unfocused term like liberty or justice .
while the united nations millennium declaration identified principles and treaties on sustainable development including economic development social development and environmental protection it continued using three domains economics environment and social sustainability .
more recently using a systematic domain model that responds to the debates over the last decade the circles of sustainability approach distinguished four domains of economic ecological political and cultural sustainability this in accord with the united nations unesco agenda and in particular the agenda for culture which specifies culture as the fourth domain of sustainable development .
human sustainability can be achieved by attaining sustainability in all levels of the seven modalitiesintegral elements of sustainability are research and innovation activities .
it aims at defining and implementing a transformative agenda to greening the economy and the society as a whole so to make them sustainable .
additionally instigating innovative and sustainable travel and transportation solutions must play a vital role in this process .
resiliencethinking evolved from the need to manage interactions between humanconstructed systems and natural ecosystems in a sustainable way despite the fact that to policymakers a definition remains elusive .
it is also concerned with commitment from geopolitical policymakers to promote and manage essential planetary ecological resources in order to promote resilience and achieve sustainability of these essential resources for benefit of future generations of life .
the resiliency of an ecosystem and thereby its sustainability can be reasonably measured at junctures or events where the combination of naturally occurring regenerative forces solar energy water soil atmosphere vegetation and biomass interact with the energy released into the ecosystem from disturbances .
a practical view of sustainability is closed systems that maintain processes of productivity indefinitely by replacing resources used by actions of people with resources of equal or greater value by those same people without degrading or endangering natural biotic systems .
in this way sustainability can be concretely measured in human projects if there is a transparent accounting of the resources put back into the ecosystem to replace those displaced .
in analysing systems such as urban and national parks dams farms and gardens theme parks openpit mines water catchments one way to look at the relationship between sustainability and resiliency is to view the former with a longterm vision and resiliency as the capacity of human engineers to respond to immediate environmental events .
the history of sustainability traces humandominated ecological systems from the earliest civilizations to the present day .
this history is characterized by the increased regional success of a particular society followed by crises that were either resolved producing sustainability or not leading to decline .
the philosophical and analytic framework of sustainability draws on and connects with many different disciplines and fields in recent years an area that has come to be called sustainability science has emerged .
sustainability is studied and managed over many scales levels or frames of reference of time and space and in many contexts of environmental social and economic organization .
the focus ranges from the total carrying capacity sustainability of planet earth to the sustainability of economic sectors ecosystems countries municipalities neighbourhoods home gardens individual lives individual goods and services clarification needed occupations lifestyles behaviour patterns and so on .
the sheer size and complexity of the planetary ecosystem has proved problematic for the design of practical measures to reach global sustainability .
to shed light on the big picture explorer and sustainability campaigner jason lewis has drawn parallels to other more tangible closed systems .
these concepts seem intuitively to be more sustainable than the current linear economic system .
for example the social dimension of sustainability seems to be only marginally addressed in many publications on the circular economy and there are cases that require different or additional strategies like purchasing new more energy efficient equipment .
a review of a team of researchers from cambridge and tu delft identified eight different relationship types between sustainability and the circular economy namely a conditional relation a strong conditional relation a necessary but not sufficient conditional relation a beneficial relationship a structured and unstructured subset relation a degree relation a costbenefittradeoff relation and a selective relation .
sustainability measurement is the quantitative basis for the informed management of sustainability .
the metrics used for the measurement of sustainability involving the sustainability of environmental social and economic domains both individually and in various combinations are evolving they include indicators benchmarks audits sustainability standards and certification systems like fairtrade and organic indexes and accounting as well as assessment appraisal and other reporting systems .
some of the best known and most widely used sustainability measures include corporate sustainability reporting triple bottom line accounting world sustainability society circles of sustainability and estimates of the quality of sustainability governance for individual countries using the environmental sustainability index and environmental performance indexcompanies such as lieef wwwlieefcom have started reporting esg metrics on behalf of companies and investment funds in an effort to increase transparency through patenting pending technology that measures emissions from a gross to net basis .
it is the combination of population increase in the developing world and unsustainable consumption levels in the developed world that poses a stark challenge to sustainability .
by over exploiting forests and fisheries the figure right examines sustainability at the scale of individual countries by contrasting their ecological footprint with their un human development index a measure of standard of living .
the graph shows what is necessary for countries to maintain an acceptable standard of living for their citizens while at the same time maintaining sustainable resource use .
the general trend is for higher standards of living to become less sustainable .
the sustainability goal is to raise the global standard of living without increasing the use of resources beyond globally sustainable levels that is to not exceed one planet consumption .
information generated by reports at the national regional and city scales confirm the global trend towards societies that are becoming less sustainable over time .
romanian american economist nicholas georgescuroegen a progenitor in economics and a paradigm founder of ecological economics has argued that the carrying capacity of earth that is earth s capacity to sustain human populations and consumption levels is bound to decrease sometime in the future as earth s finite stock of mineral resources is presently being extracted and put to use .
the enterprise scale carrying capacity now also plays a critical role in making it possible to measure and report the sustainability performance of individual organizations .
this is most clearly demonstrated through use of contextbased sustainability cbs tools methods and metrics including the multicapital scorecard which have been in development since .
contrary to many other mainstream approaches to measuring the sustainability performance of organizations which tend to be more incrementalist in form cbs is explicitly tied to social environmental and economic limits and thresholds in the world .
thus rather than simply measure and report changes in relative terms from one period to another cbs makes it possible to compare the impacts of organizations to organizationspecific norms standards or thresholds for what they the impacts would have to be in order to be empirically sustainable ie which if generalized to a larger population would not fail to maintain the sufficiency of vital resources for human or nonhuman wellbeing .
the sustainable development goals sdgs are the current harmonized set of seventeen future international development targetsthe official agenda for sustainable development adopted on september has paragraphs with the main paragraph outlining the sustainable development goals and its associated targets .
the sustainable development goals sdgs replace the eight millennium development goals mdgs which expired at the end of .
adopted by the united nations member states at the time and more than twenty international organizations these goals were advanced to help achieve the following sustainable development standards by to the data that member countries represented to the united nations cuba was the only country in the world in that met the world wide fund for nature s definition of sustainable development with an ecological footprint of less than hectares per capita and a human development index of over .
herman daly has suggested three broad criteria for ecological sustainability renewable resources should provide a sustainable yield the rate of harvest should not exceed the rate of regeneration for nonrenewable resources there should be equivalent development of renewable substitutes waste generation should not exceed the assimilative capacity of the environment .
at the global scale and in the broadest sense environmental management involves the oceans freshwater systems land and atmosphere but following the sustainability principle of scale it can be equally applied to any ecosystem from a tropical rainforest to a home garden .
at the local human scale major sustainability benefits accrue from sustainable parks and gardens and green cities .
environmental problems associated with industrial agriculture and agribusiness are now being addressed through such movements as sustainable agriculture organic farming and more sustainable business practices .
this impact is reduced by not only consuming less but by also making the full cycle of production use and disposal more sustainable .
a promising direction towards sustainable development is to design systems that are flexible and reversible .
the american public health association apha defines a sustainable food system as one that provides healthy food to meet current food needs while maintaining healthy ecosystems that can also provide food for generations to come with minimal negative impact to the environment .
a sustainable food system also encourages local production and distribution infrastructures and makes nutritious food available accessible and affordable to all .
concerns about the environmental impacts of agribusiness and the stark contrast between the obesity problems of the western world and the poverty and food insecurity of the developing world have generated a strong movement towards healthy sustainable eating as a major component of overall ethical consumerism .
at the global level the environmental impact of agribusiness is being addressed through sustainable agriculture and organic farming .
at the local level there are various movements working towards local food production more productive use of urban wastelands and domestic gardens including permaculture urban horticulture local food slow food sustainable gardening and organic gardening .
sustainable seafood is seafood from either fished or farmed sources that can maintain or increase production in the future without jeopardizing the ecosystems from which it was acquired .
the sustainable seafood movement has gained momentum as more people become aware about both overfishing and environmentally destructive fishing methodsas global population and affluence has increased so has the use of various materials increased in volume diversity and distance transported .
developed countries citizens consume an average of tons of those four key resources per capita ranging up to or more tons per person in some developed countries with resource consumption levels far beyond what is likely sustainable .
sustainable use of materials has targeted the idea of dematerialization converting the linear path of materials extraction use disposal in landfill to a circular material flow that reuses materials as much as possible much like the cycling and reuse of waste in nature .
the use of sustainable biomaterials that come from renewable sources and that can be recycled is preferred to the use on nonrenewables from a life cycle standpointsynthetic chemical production has escalated following the stimulus it received during the second world war .
the european union is expected to table by the end of an ambitious circular economy package which is expected to include concrete legislative proposals on waste management ecodesign and limits on land fillson one account sustainability concerns the specification of a set of actions to be taken by present persons that will not diminish the prospects of future persons to enjoy levels of consumption wealth utility or welfare comparable to those enjoyed by present persons .
sustainability interfaces with economics through the social and ecological consequences of economic activity .
sustainability economics represents a broad interpretation of ecological economics where environmental and ecological variables and issues are basic but part of a multidimensional perspective .
however the concept of sustainability is much broader than the concepts of sustained yield of welfare resources or profit margins .
at present the average per capita consumption of people in the developing world is sustainable but population numbers are increasing and individuals are aspiring to highconsumption western lifestyles .
the challenge for sustainability is to curb and manage western consumption while raising the standard of living of the developing world without increasing its resource use and environmental impact .
while conventional economics is concerned largely with economic growth and the efficient allocation of resources ecological economics has the explicit goal of sustainable scale rather than continual growth fair distribution and efficient allocation in that order .
the world business council for sustainable development states that business can not succeed in societies that fail .
an economy that is able to sustain gdp growth without having a negative impact on the environment is said to be decoupled .
sustainability studies analyse ways to reduce resource intensity the amount of resource eg .
consequently longterm sustainability requires the transition to a steady state economy in which total gdp remains more or less constant as has been advocated for decades by herman daly and others in the ecological economics communitya different proposed solution to partially decouple economic growth from environmental degradation is the restore approach .
treating the environment as an externality may generate shortterm profit at the expense of sustainability .
sustainable business practices on the other hand integrate ecological concerns with social and economic ones ie the triple bottom line .
energy efficiency can also increase profits by reducing coststhe idea of sustainability as a business opportunity has led to the formation of organizations such as the sustainability consortium of the society for organizational learning the sustainable business institute and the world council for sustainable development .
the expansion of sustainable business opportunities can contribute to job creation through the introduction of greencollar workers .
research focusing on progressive corporate leaders who have integrated sustainability into commercial strategy has yielded a leadership competency model for sustainability and led to emergence of the concept of embedded sustainability by its authors chris laszlo and nadya zhexembayeva as incorporation of environmental health and social value into the core business with no tradeoff in price or other words with no social or green premium .
laszlo and zhexembayeva s research showed that embedded sustainability offers at least seven distinct opportunities for business value creation a better riskmanagement b increased efficiency through reduced waste and resource use c better product differentiation d new market entrances e enhanced brand and reputation f greater opportunity to influence industry standards and g greater opportunity for radical innovation .
one school of thought often labeled ecosocialism or ecological marxism asserts that the capitalist economic system is fundamentally incompatible with the ecological and social requirements of sustainability .
lowrisk technologysciencebased solutions such as solar power sustainable agriculture and increases in energy efficiency are seen as necessary but insufficient .
sustainable business models and the triple bottom line are viewed as morally praiseworthy but ignorant to the tendency in capitalism for the distribution of wealth to become increasingly unequal and socially unstableunsustainable .
ecosocialists advocate for the revolutionary succession of capitalism by egalitarian economicpoliticalsocial structure designed to harmonize human society with nonhuman ecology and to fulfill human the only sufficient solution to the presentday ecological crisis and hence the only path towards sustainability .
sustainability is viewed not as a domain exclusive to scientists environmental activists and business leaders but as a holistic project that must involve the whole of humanity redefining its place in nature what every environmentalist needs to know is that capitalism is not the solution but the problem and that if humanity is going to survive this crisis it will do so because it has exercised its capacity for human freedom through social struggle in order to create a whole new coevolution with the planet .
sustainability issues are generally expressed in scientific and environmental terms as well as in ethical terms of stewardship but implementing change is a social challenge that entails among other things international and national law urban planning and transport local and individual lifestyles and ethical consumerism .
broadbased strategies for more sustainable social systems include improved education and the political empowerment of women especially in developing countries greater regard for social justice notably equity between rich and poor both within and between countries and intergenerational equity .
this aspect of sustainability has been referred to as environmental security and creates a clear need for global environmental agreements to manage resources such as aquifers and rivers which span political boundaries and to protect shared global systems including oceans and the atmosphere .
a major hurdle to achieve sustainability is the alleviation of poverty .
the word sustainability is also used widely by western country development agencies and international charities to focus their poverty alleviation efforts in ways that can be sustained by the local populace and its environment .
for example teaching water treatment to the poor by boiling their water with charcoal would not generally be considered a sustainable strategy whereas using pet solar water disinfection would be .
also sustainable best practices can involve the recycling of materials such as the use of recycled plastics for lumber where deforestation has devastated a country s timber base .
another example of sustainable practices in poverty alleviation is the use of exported recycled materials from developed to developing countries such as bridges to prosperity s use of wire rope from shipping container gantry cranes to act as the structural wire rope for footbridges that cross rivers in poor rural areas in asia and africaaccording to murray bookchin the idea that humans must dominate nature is common in hierarchical societies .
reduce encroachment upon natureone approach to sustainable living exemplified by smallscale urban transition towns and rural ecovillages seeks to create selfreliant communities based on principles of simple living which maximize selfsufficiency particularly in food production .
other approaches loosely based around new urbanism are successfully reducing environmental impacts by altering the built environment to create and preserve sustainable cities which support sustainable transport and zero emission housing .
in sustainable architecture the recent movement of new classical architecture promotes a sustainable approach towards construction that appreciates and develops smart growth architectural tradition and classical design .
the concept of circular flow land use management has also been introduced in europe to promote sustainable land use patterns that strive for compact cities and a reduction of greenfield land take by urban sprawllarge scale social movements can influence both community choices and the built environment .
ecomunicipalities take a systems approach based on sustainability principles .
in sweden more than cities and per cent of all municipalities in the adopted a common set of sustainability principles and implemented these systematically throughout their municipal operations .
there are now twelve ecomunicipalities in the united states and the american planning association has adopted sustainability objectives based on the same principles .
but the transition required to reduce global human consumption to within sustainable limits involves much larger changes at all levels and contexts of society .
the united nations has recognised the central role of education and have declared a decade of education for sustainable development which aims to challenge us all to adopt new behaviours and practices to secure our future .
the worldwide fund for nature proposes a strategy for sustainability that goes beyond education to tackle underlying individualistic and materialistic societal values headon and strengthen people s connections with the natural world .
application of social sustainability requires stakeholders to look at human and labor rights prevention of human trafficking and other human rights risks .
the international community has identified many industries whose practices have been known to violate social sustainability and many of these industries have organizations in place that aid in verifying the social sustainability of products and services .
the cultural dimension of sustainability is known as cultural sustainability .
feelings of authenticity at a tourist site are thus implicitly linked to sustainable tourism as the maximisation of existential felt authenticity at sites of limited historical provenance increases the likelihood of return visits .
this website uses cookies to ensure you get the best experiencefor more information on cookies and how you can disable them please view our cookie policywe are making the futurethe cause of our presentdesigning impactful engagementdesigning impactful engagementratings revisitedsetting tracking integrating highimpact sustainability goalsa broader viewof healthissue autumn our membershiptoday the international federation of pharmaceutical manufacturers associations ifpma launches the report years of global health progress which traces global health progress over the past years and also looks forward to challenges and opportunities for the next years .
the report authored by sustainability marks ifpma s anniversary and launches on the what issustainability can oursociety endure the future ofbusiness leadershipour latest news and updates in your inbox every monthsee how we use your personal data by reading our terms of use and privacy greville stlondon prospect streetbrooklyn ny floor university avenueberkeley ca sustainability all rights reserved .
sustainability isn t part of our work it s a guiding influence for all of our work .
learn more about what epa is doing and what you can dolearn about sustainability research grants and scientific tools to support sustainable decision makingsearch epa programs tools models and other resources that promote sustainabilitycheck out the green infrastucture wizardlearn about the green check tag for federal green purchasingexitcontact us to ask a question provide feedback or report a problemlast updated on october .
to pursue sustainability is to create and maintain the conditions under which humans and nature can exist in productive harmony to support present and future generationslearn more about sustainability and how epa incorporates it into its work in the national reseach council s report sustainability and the us epathe national environmental policy act of committed the united states to sustainability declaring it a national policy to create and maintain conditions under which humans and nature can exist in productive harmony that permit fulfilling the social economic and other requirements of present and future generations in the years since nepa was enacted the public s interest in sustainability has broadened .
according to the national research council there are many additional drivers for sustainability .
in the areas where the us has seen considerable progress in sustainability a common driver for sustainability efforts is citizens and other stakeholders concern .
in addition sustainability practitioners are becoming more ambitious in their sustainability efforts and are working together to share best practices to ensure the greatest environmental economic and social impact .
epa has a long history of working toward sustainable outcomes .
to encourage progress epa developed a strategic approach to incorporate sustainability principles into its work .
epa has a variety of methods tools guidances and programs that the application of sustainability within decisionmaking including this database is an inventory of sustainability indicators classified into a single system .
if the information you are looking for is not here you may be able to find it on the epa web archive or the january web snapshotuse the following search engines to find tools and resources developed by epa search for epa sustainability programs tools models and other resourcesconnect to epa s green infrastructure programs tools models and other resourcesconnect to epa s sustainable materials management programs tools models and other resourcescontact us to ask a question provide feedback or report a problemlast updated on october .
by administrator lisa p jacksonthis week i join colleagues from across the us and around the world at the un conference on sustainable development .
on the anniversary of the un earth summit that set an early course for sustainability across the globe we are working to shape the next years of sustainable development with the help of governments businesses students nonprofits and global citizensour work will be focused on new strategies to reinvest in the health and prosperity of urban communities .
i will be sharing the stories of individuals and organizations that are implementing new environmental education programs and creating the green jobs of the future and we re preparing to unveil videos submitted through the youth sustainability challenge .
please send us your stories of sustainability this week on facebook and twitter using the hashtag epario so that we can share them with the worldeven if you can t be there in person i hope you will join online .
go to http to see and participate in all of the events being hosted by the us government and be a part of our efforts to build a better more sustainable and more prosperous futureabout the author lisa jackson is the administrator of the us environmental protection agencyeditor s note the views expressed here are intended to explain epa policy .
sustainability is a broad discipline giving students and graduates insights into most aspects of the human world from business to technology to environment and the social sciences .
sustainability draws on politics economics and philosophy and other social sciences as well as the hard sciences .
sustainability skills and environmental awareness is a priority in many corporate jobs at graduate level and over as businesses seek to adhere to new legislation .
therefore sustainability graduates will go into many fields but most commonly civic planning environmental consultancy built and natural environment agriculture not for profit corporate strategies health assessment and planning and even into law and decision making .
when we hear the word sustainability we tend to think of renewable fuel sources reducing carbon emissions protecting environments and a way of keeping the delicate ecosystems of our planet in balance .
in short sustainability looks to protect our natural environment human and ecological health while driving innovation and not compromising our way of life .
because of this growing requirement a master s will not necessarily be required for most jobs as bachelor s programs and in some cases lower than this prepares people for a career in sustainability .
read more about the various sustainability degrees and educationthe definition of sustainability is the study of how natural systems function remain diverse and produce everything it needs for the ecology to remain in balance .
it also acknowledges that human civilisation takes resources to sustain our modern way of life .
sustainability takes into account how we might live in harmony with the natural world around us protecting it from damage and destructionwe now live in a modern consumerist and largely urban existence throughout the developed world and we consume a lot of natural resources every day .
that s not to say that sustainable living should only focus on people who live in urban centres though there are improvements to be made everywhere it is estimated that we use about more resources every year than we can put back and that needs to change .
sustainability and sustainable development focuses on balancing that fine line between competing needs our need to move forward technologically and economically and the needs to protect the environments in which we and others live .
sustainability is not just about the environment it s also about our health as a society in ensuring that no people or areas of life suffer as a result of environmental legislation and it s also about examining the longer term effects of the actions humanity takes and asking questions about how it may be improved in the world summit on social development identified three core areas that contribute to the philosophy and social science of sustainable development .
it is also about providing incentives for businesses and other organisations to adhere to sustainability guidelines beyond their normal legislative requirements .
the biggest hot topic for many people right now is sustainable housing and how we can better build the homes we live in from sustainable material .
the final element is education encouraging people to participate in environmental sustainability and teaching them about the effects of environmental protection as well as warning of the dangers if we can not achieve our goals we all know what we need to do to protect the environment whether that is recycling reducing our power consumption by switching electronic devices off rather than using standby by walking short journeys instead of taking the bus .
it defines how we should study and protect ecosystems air quality integrity and sustainability of our resources and focusing on the elements that place stress on the environment .
it also concerns how technology will drive our greener future the epa recognized that developing technology and biotechnology is key to this sustainability and protecting the environment of the future from potential damage that technological advances could potentially bring the sustainable development professional network thinks acts and works globally .
in the united nations conference on sustainable development met to discuss and develop a set of goals to work towards they grew out of the millennium development goals mdg that claimed success in reducing global poverty while acknowledging there was still much more to do .
slash and burn farming replaced natural wilderness often with uniform crop plantation and camps gave way to settlements then eventually villages towns and cities which would put pressure on the environmentsometimes the environmental pressures forced people into making these changes in the first place growing human population being one of those pressures and often eventually they had to move on to somewhere new where the environmental could better sustain them and their practices or make further changes to their existing environment .
there was no real concept of sustainable living even if the people of the distant past understood that soil had a maximum fertility that could be exhausted and replenished with livestockit is widely acknowledged that many societies collapsed due to an inability to adapt to the conditions brought on by these unsustainable practices .
cultural change often led to survival of those societies beyond what might have been expected under the circumstances though some renaissance and enlightenment philosophers would express concern about resources and overpopulation and whether these were sustainable in the long term these people were not taken seriously at the time other than as a hypothetical question .
today their remit is to contribute to the building of peace the eradication of poverty sustainable development and intercultural dialogue through education the sciences culture communication and information by the late century the science of climate change was firmly established .
it was then that we saw the the social economic and scientific birth of the environmental movementit is not yet clear what our sustainable future will look like but with emerging technologies and the improvement of older cleaner fuel sources many people now look to a post fossil fuel world including businesses .
it s vital that we develop new cleaner technologies to cope with our energy demands but sustainability is not just about the environmentthe biggest social activism movement related to the social development side of sustainability has been programs such as fair trade and the rainforest alliance in encouraging good farming practices while ensuring farmers who produce luxury goods such as coffee and cocoa receive a decent living wage .
activist and sustainability professionals hope to remove trade barriers in future so that they may benefit everyone contributing to the economic and social development core of sustainability while promoting good environmental practice sourceschronology tools and methods for dating historical and ancient deposits inclusions and remainsmeteorology something in the airbirds ecosystem serviceshow does dating work environmental consequences of fishing practices .
log in sitemap skip to content text version contact usthere is no universally agreed definition on what sustainability means .
the idea of sustainability stems from the concept of sustainable development which became common language at the world s first earth summit in rio in .
the original definition of sustainable development is usually considered to be development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs .
many argue that sustainability has been hijacked and twisted to suit government and business that really want to continue with business as usualthe quotes below will provide some ideas on what constitutes sustainable development and sustainability .
a process of change in which the exploitation of resources the direction of investments the orientation of technological development and institutional change are all in harmony and enhance both current and future potential to meet human needs and aspirations the world commission on environment and development sustainable development is a dynamic process which enables people to realise their potential and improve their quality of life in ways which simultaneously protect and enhance the earth s life support systems forum for the future in essence sustainable development is about five key principles quality of life fairness and equity participation and partnership care for our environment and respect for ecological constraints recognising there are environmental limits and thought for the future and the precautionary principle .
from making london work by forum for the future s sustainable wealth london project the environment must be to preserve essential ecosystem functions and to provide for the wellbeing of future generations environmental and economic policy must be integrated the goal of policy should be an improvement in the overall quality of life not just income growth poverty must be ended and resources distributed more equally and all sections of society must be involved in decision making .
the real world coalition a definition based on the work of the world commission on environment and development we can not just add sustainable development to our current list of things to do but must learn to integrate the concepts into everything that we do .
the dorset education for sustainability network a sustainable future is one in which a healthy environment economic prosperity and social justice are pursued simultaneously to ensure the wellbeing and quality of life of present and future generations .
learning for a sustainable future teacher centre the first and perhaps most difficult problem one that seldom gets addressed is the time a sustainable society one that endures for a decade a human lifetime or a thousand years .
the shaky ground of sustainable development donald worster in global ecology what do you believe are the most pressing questions priorities and challenges to the creation of a sustainable society both locally and globally .
sustainability is something everyone can work towards whether it is picking up garbage you see on the street or boycotting a company that practices environmentally harmful business methods we all can make a difference .
un decade of education for sustainable development the overall goal of the un decade of education for sustainable development desd is to integrate the principles values and practices of sustainable development into all aspects of education and learning .
this educational effort will encourage changes in behaviour that will create a more sustainable future in terms of environmental integrity economic viability and a just society for present and future generations .
social life is the least defined and least understood of the different ways of approaching sustainability and sustainable development .
social sustainability has had considerably less attention in public dialogue than economic and environmental sustainabilitythere are several approaches to sustainability .
the first which posits a triad of environmental sustainability economic sustainability and social sustainability is the most widely accepted as a model for addressing sustainability .
the concept of social sustainability in this approach encompasses such topics as social equity livability health equity community development social capital social support human rights labour rights placemaking social responsibility social justice cultural competence community resilience and human adaptationa second more recent approach suggests that all of the domains of sustainability are social including ecological economic political and cultural sustainability .
these domains of social sustainability are all dependent upon the relationship between the social and the natural with the ecological domain defined as human embeddedness in the environment .
in these terms social sustainability encompasses all human activities .
see the venn diagram and the circles of sustainability diagram according to the western australia council of social services wacoss social sustainability occurs when the formal and informal processes systems structures and relationships actively support the capacity of current and future generations to create healthy and liveable communities .
socially sustainable communities are equitable diverse connected and democratic and provide a good quality of life .
they define social sustainability as a process for creating sustainable successful places that promote wellbeing by understanding what people need from the places they live and work .
social sustainability combines design of the physical realm with design of the social world infrastructure to support social and cultural life social amenities systems for citizen engagement and space for people and places to evolve .
social life have developed a framework for social sustainability which has four dimensions amenities and infrastructure social and cultural life voice and influence and space to grow .
nobel laureate amartya sen gives the following dimensions for social sustainability also we can speak of sustainable human development that can be seen as development that promotes the capabilities of present people without compromising capabilities of future generations .
the different aspects of social sustainability are often considered in socially responsible investing sri .
social sustainability criteria that are commonly used by sri funds and indexes to rate publicly traded companies include community diversity employee relations human rights product safety reporting and governance structure .
in addition resources like the global reporting initiative and business and human rights resource centre all provide information on organizational disclosures and performance in social sustainability .
certifications from internationally recognized and accredited organizations are available to aid in verifying the social sustainability of products and services .
design for social sustainability sets out a framework for planning and designing the service spaces housing and governance arrangements to help local communities to thrivesocial sustainability is largely neglected in mainstream sustainability debates .
priority has been given to economic and environmental sustainability in particular in the context of urban planning and housing where policy and investment has focused on renewable resources low carbon communities and encouraging proenvironmental household behaviours .
as a result there are few practical resources that directly address the question of how to create places that are socially sustainable as well as physical infrastructure that is environmentally sustainable .
without the right social infrastructure new communities can quickly spiral into declinethis report is based on work with the homes and communities agency to understand how to change the way planners and built environment professionals think about creating new placesdesign for social sustainability by social life is licensed under a creative commons attributionnoncommercialnoderivs unported licensebased on a work at wwwsociallifeco .
connect the dots between the guiding principles for sustainable federal buildings and other industry standards guidelines and rating systemsplug loads refer to energy used by equipment that is plugged into an outlet .
plug loads can average approximately of electricity use in office settings much of which can be attributed to parasitic loadsdetermine which upgrades could be most costeffective based on the size and location of your buildinguse integrative design approaches and collaborative practices to save time and moneyexplore interior office workspaces and learn about sustainable design best practices as you compare materialsexplore building systems their relationships to one another and the integrative team necessary to reach sustainability goals .
view generic solicitationcontract language that can be used to incorporate minimum sustainability requirements into contracts for products .
this module is intended for the acquisition workforce particularly procurement officials requirement officialsspecifiers and other staff who affect acquisition decisions to help verify contractor compliance with sustainability requirements specified in contracts .
both preaward procurement actions for incorporating sustainability best practices into the contract and postaward procurement actions for verifying compliance with contract requirements are covered .
for information on determining what sustainable requirements are applicable for your procurement visit the green procurement compilation .
visit resources for verifying sustainable products for guidance on determining whether documentation provided by the contractor confirms the product or service meets the sustainable requirements included in the contract .
connect the dots between the guiding principles for sustainable federal buildings and other industry standards guidelines and rating systemsplug loads refer to energy used by equipment that is plugged into an outlet .
plug loads can average approximately of electricity use in office settings much of which can be attributed to parasitic loadsdetermine which upgrades could be most costeffective based on the size and location of your buildinguse integrative design approaches and collaborative practices to save time and moneyexplore interior office workspaces and learn about sustainable design best practices as you compare materialsexplore building systems their relationships to one another and the integrative team necessary to reach sustainability goals .
view generic solicitationcontract language that can be used to incorporate minimum sustainability requirements into contracts for products .
it is important to tailor the goals and requirements to each individual acquisition any apparel provided under this contract must be supplied by a member of the sustainable apparel coalition any electronics it hardware it software monitors cell phones provided under this contract must be supplied by a member of the electronic industry citizenship coalition .
connect the dots between the guiding principles for sustainable federal buildings and other industry standards guidelines and rating systemsplug loads refer to energy used by equipment that is plugged into an outlet .
plug loads can average approximately of electricity use in office settings much of which can be attributed to parasitic loadsdetermine which upgrades could be most costeffective based on the size and location of your buildinguse integrative design approaches and collaborative practices to save time and moneyexplore interior office workspaces and learn about sustainable design best practices as you compare materialsexplore building systems their relationships to one another and the integrative team necessary to reach sustainability goals .
view generic solicitationcontract language that can be used to incorporate minimum sustainability requirements into contracts for products .
circles of social life is an approach that guides engaged and collaborative practice in making our cities locales and organizations more sustainable resilient adaptable and liveable .
as part of this overall approach circles of sustainability provides practical tools for creating sustainable cities and communities .
for example instead of designating a pregiven set of indicators the approach sets out a process for deciding upon indicators and analysing the relationship between themthis is all developed in detail in a book that forms the basis of this website published by routledge called urban sustainability in theory and practice circles of sustainabilitythe circles approach provides tools for responding to four key questions .
social life is rarely enacted as a straight line of cause and effecthow can we best depict the sustainability resilience adaptability and liveability of our cities .
the resulting profiles remain simple on the surface even as they encourage deep researchwhat possible practical pathways should we take in the process of developing a positive response to issues of sustainability resilience adaptability and liveability process circles guide practitioners through logical pathways for carrying out a project large or small .
sustainability measurement is the quantitative basis for the informed management of sustainability .
the metrics used for the measurement of sustainability involving the sustainability of environmental social and economic domains both individually and in various combinations are still evolving they include indicators benchmarks audits indexes and accounting as well as assessment appraisal and other reporting systems .
some of the best known and most widely used sustainability measures include corporate sustainability reporting triple bottom line accounting and estimates of the quality of sustainability governance for individual countries using the environmental sustainability index and environmental performance index .
an alternative approach used by the united nations global compact cities programme and explicitly critical of the triplebottomline approach is circles of sustainabilitythe principal objective of sustainability indicators is to inform public policymaking as part of the process of sustainability governance .
sustainability indicators can provide information on any aspect of the interplay between the environment and socioeconomic activities .
societal r esponses policy guided by sustainability indicators can be introduced at any stage of this sequence of eventsthe united nations has developed extensive sustainability measurement tools in relation to sustainable development as well as a system of integrated environmental and economic accounting .
in the last couple of decades there has arisen a crowded toolbox of quantitative methods used to assess sustainability including measures of resource use like life cycle assessment measures of consumption like the ecological footprint and measurements of quality of environmental governance like the environmental performance index .
the following is a list of quantitative tools used by sustainability scientists the different categories are for convenience only as defining criteria will intergrade .
david pimentel professor of ecology and agriculture at cornell university and mario giampietro senior researcher at the national research institute on food and nutrition inran place in their study food land population and the us economy the maximum us population for a sustainable economy at million .
to achieve a sustainable economy world population will have to be reduced by twothirds says the study .
this website uses cookies to ensure you get the best experiencefor more information on cookies and how you can disable them please view our cookie policywe are making the futurethe cause of our presentdesigning impactful engagementdesigning impactful engagementratings revisitedsetting tracking integrating highimpact sustainability goalsa broader viewof healthissue autumn our membershiptoday the international federation of pharmaceutical manufacturers associations ifpma launches the report years of global health progress which traces global health progress over the past years and also looks forward to challenges and opportunities for the next years .
the report authored by sustainability marks ifpma s anniversary and launches on the what issustainability can oursociety endure the future ofbusiness leadershipour latest news and updates in your inbox every monthsee how we use your personal data by reading our terms of use and privacy greville stlondon prospect streetbrooklyn ny floor university avenueberkeley ca sustainability all rights reserved .
this website uses cookies to ensure you get the best experiencefor more information on cookies and how you can disable them please view our cookie policywe inspire and enable business to lead theway to a sustainable economyour unique blend of thinking and advice inspire and enableleaders to drive change inside companies within valuechains across markets and through systems .
we help clients make better decisions integrate sustainability into their business and create innovative solutionsclick the sections in the diagram to find out more about our core serviceswe are trusted to deliver highvalue insights and thinking to help companies understand sustainability issues and make better decisionslearn about ourintelligence trends serviceslearn about our materiality serviceswe design and facilitate powerful dialogues and collaborations because only by building great relationships can we accelerate progress at the pace and scale requiredwe influence at senior level and help leaders integrate sustainability into core business strategy and operationslearn about our business model innovation servicesour independent agendashaping research and advocacy enables companies to transform how they think and do businesstrends tracking and interpretation providing detailed and timely analysis of the emerging issues and longterm trends influencing and shaping markets and societysustainability thought leadership including surveys issue briefs blogs and reports to inform our clients strategies and help them succeedindependent applicable research on ideas innovations and approaches that will shape tomorrow s markets and determine the future of corporate leadership .
designing impactful engagementdesigning impactful engagementsustainable food systems and diets a review of multistakeholder initiativesa globescan sustainability surveya shareholder activism for sustainability reportwe convene the sustainability transparency network a global network of companies that believe transparency and integration have a critical role to play in accelerating positive business impactswe work with leading companies around the world and across sectors of the economysenior directortwitter linkedin directortwitter linkedin to learn more about how we can help your company please get in touch .
download services fact sheetget in touchthe future ofbusiness leadershipour latest news and updates in your inbox every monthsee how we use your personal data by reading our terms of use and privacy greville stlondon prospect streetbrooklyn ny floor university avenueberkeley ca sustainability all rights reserved .
by administrator lisa p jacksonthis week i join colleagues from across the us and around the world at the un conference on sustainable development .
on the anniversary of the un earth summit that set an early course for sustainability across the globe we are working to shape the next years of sustainable development with the help of governments businesses students nonprofits and global citizensour work will be focused on new strategies to reinvest in the health and prosperity of urban communities .
i will be sharing the stories of individuals and organizations that are implementing new environmental education programs and creating the green jobs of the future and we re preparing to unveil videos submitted through the youth sustainability challenge .
please send us your stories of sustainability this week on facebook and twitter using the hashtag epario so that we can share them with the worldeven if you can t be there in person i hope you will join online .
go to http to see and participate in all of the events being hosted by the us government and be a part of our efforts to build a better more sustainable and more prosperous futureabout the author lisa jackson is the administrator of the us environmental protection agencyeditor s note the views expressed here are intended to explain epa policy .
jump to main contentjump to navigationexecutive order planning for federal sustainability in the next decadeby the authority vested in me as president by the constitution and the laws of the united states of america and in order to maintain federal leadership in sustainability and greenhouse gas emission reductions it is hereby ordered as follows section .
executive departments and agencies agencies have been among our nation s leaders as the united states works to build a clean energy economy that will sustain our prosperity and the health of our people and our environment for generations to come .
to improve environmental performance and federal sustainability priority should first be placed on reducing energy use and cost then on finding renewable or alternative energy solutions .
sustainability goals for agencies .
in implementing the policy set forth in section of this order and to achieve the goals of section of this order the head of each agency shall where lifecycle costeffective beginning in fiscal year unless otherwise specified a promote building energy conservation efficiency and management by i reducing agency building energy intensity measured in british thermal units per gross square foot by percent annually through the end of fiscal year relative to the baseline of the agency s building energy use in fiscal year and taking into account agency progress to date except where revised pursuant to section f of this order by implementing efficiency measures based on and using practices such as a using remote building energy performance assessment auditing technology b participating in demand management programs c ensuring that monthly performance data is entered into the environmental protection agency epa energy star portfolio manager for covered buildings d incorporating where feasible the consensusbased industry standard green button data access system into reporting data analytics and automation processes e implementing space utilization and optimization practices and policies f identifying opportunities to transition testbed technologies to achieve the goals of this section and g conforming where feasible to city energy performance benchmarking and reporting requirements and ii improving data center energy efficiency at agency facilities by a ensuring the agency chief information officer promotes data center energy optimization efficiency and performance b installing and monitoring advanced energy meters in all data centers by fiscal year and c establishing a power usage effectiveness target of to for new data centers and less than for existing data centers b ensure that at a minimum the following percentage of the total amount of building electric energy and thermal energy shall be clean energy accounted for by renewable electric energy and alternative energy i not less than percent in fiscal years and ii not less than percent in fiscal years and iii not less than percent in fiscal years and iv not less than percent in fiscal years and and v not less than percent by fiscal year and each year thereafter c ensure that the percentage of the total amount of building electric energy consumed by the agency that is renewable electric energy is i not less than percent in fiscal years and ii not less than percent in fiscal years and iii not less than percent in fiscal years and iv not less than percent in fiscal years and and v not less than percent by fiscal year and each year thereafter d include in the renewable electric energy portion of the clean energy target established in subsection b of this section renewable electric energy as defined in section v of this order and associated with the following actions which are listed in order of priority i installing agencyfunded renewable energy on site at federal facilities and retaining corresponding renewable energy certificates recs or obtaining equal value replacement recs ii contracting for the purchase of energy that includes the installation of renewable energy on site at a federal facility or off site from a federal facility and the retention of corresponding recs or obtaining equal value replacement recs for the term of the contract iii purchasing electricity and corresponding recs or obtaining equal value replacement recs and iv purchasing recs e include in the alternative energy portion of the clean energy target established in subsection b of this section alternative energy as defined in section c of this order and associated with the following actions where feasible i installing thermal renewable energy on site at federal facilities and retaining corresponding renewable attributes or obtaining equal value replacement recs where applicable ii installing combined heat and power processes on site at federal facilities iii installing fuel cell energy systems on site at federal facilities iv utilizing energy from new small modular nuclear reactor technologies v utilizing energy from a new project that includes the active capture and storage of carbon dioxide emissions associated with energy generation vi implementing other alternative energy approaches that advance the policy set forth in section and achieve the goals of section of this order and are in accord with any sustainability environmental performance and other instructions or guidance established pursuant to sections e and a of this order and vii including in the department of defense dod accounting for alternative energy for this subsection fulfillment of the requirements for dod goals established under section of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year as amended by section of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year f improve agency water use efficiency and management including stormwater management by i reducing agency potable water consumption intensity measured in gallons per gross square foot by percent by fiscal year through reductions of percent annually through fiscal year relative to a baseline of the agency s water consumption in fiscal year ii installing water meters and collecting and utilizing building and facility water balance data to improve water conservation and management iii reducing agency industrial landscaping and agricultural ila water consumption measured in gallons by percent annually through fiscal year relative to a baseline of the agency s ila water consumption in fiscal year and iv installing appropriate green infrastructure features on federally owned property to help with stormwater and wastewater management g if the agency operates a fleet of at least motor vehicles improve agency fleet and vehicle efficiency and management by i determining as part of the planning requirements of section of this order the optimum fleet inventory with emphasis placed on eliminating unnecessary or nonessential vehicles from the agency s fleet inventory ii taking actions that reduce fleetwide permile greenhouse gas emissions from agency fleet vehicles relative to a baseline of emissions in fiscal year to achieve the following percentage reductions a not less than percent by the end of fiscal year b not less than percent by the end of fiscal year and c not less than percent by the end of fiscal year iii collecting and utilizing as a fleet efficiency management tool as soon as practicable but not later than years after the date of this order agency fleet operational data through deployment of vehicle telematics at a vehicle asset level for all new passenger and light duty vehicle acquisitions and for medium duty vehicles where appropriate iv ensuring that agency annual assetlevel fleet data is properly and accurately accounted for in a formal agency fleet management system and any relevant data is submitted to the federal automotive statistical tool reporting database the federal motor vehicle registration system and the fleet sustainability dashboard fleetdash system v planning for agency fleet composition such that by december zero emission vehicles or plugin hybrid vehicles account for percent of all new agency passenger vehicle acquisitions and by december zero emission vehicles or plugin hybrid vehicles account for percent of all new agency passenger vehicles and including where practicable acquisition of such vehicles in other vehicle classes and counting double credit towards the targets in this section for such acquisitions and vi planning for appropriate charging or refueling infrastructure or other power storage technologies for zero emission vehicles or plugin hybrid vehicles and opportunities for ancillary services to support vehicletogrid technology h improve building efficiency performance and management by i ensuring beginning in fiscal year and thereafter that all new construction of federal buildings greater than gross square feet that enters the planning process is designed to achieve energy netzero and where feasible water or waste netzero by fiscal year ii identifying beginning in june of as part of the planning requirements of section of this order a percentage of at least percent by number or total square footage of the agency s existing buildings above gross square feet that will by fiscal year comply with the revised guiding principles for federal leadership in high performance and sustainable buildings guiding principles developed pursuant to section of this order and making annual progress toward percent conformance with the guiding principles for its building inventory iii identifying as part of the planning requirements of section of this order a percentage of the agency s existing buildings above gross square feet intended to be energy waste or water netzero buildings by fiscal year and implementing actions that will allow those buildings to meet that target iv including in all new agency lease solicitations over rentable square feet a criteria for energy efficiency either as a required performance specification or as a source selection evaluation factor in bestvalue tradeoff procurements and b requirements for building lessor disclosure of carbon emission or energy consumption data for that portion of the building occupied by the agency that may be provided by the lessor through submetering or estimation from prorated occupancy data whichever is more costeffective v reporting building energy beginning in fiscal year as part of the agency scope greenhouse gas emissions for newly solicited leases over rentable square feet vi including in the planning for new buildings or leases costeffective strategies to optimize sustainable space usage and consideration of existing community transportation planning and infrastructure including access to public transit vii ensuring that all new construction major renovation repair and alteration of agency buildings includes appropriate design and deployment of fleet charging infrastructure and viii including the incorporation of climateresilient design and management elements into the operation repair and renovation of existing agency buildings and the design of new agency buildings i promote sustainable acquisition and procurement by ensuring that each of the following environmental performance and sustainability factors are included to the maximum extent practicable for all applicable procurements in the planning award and execution phases of the acquisition by i meeting statutory mandates that require purchase preference for a recycled content products designated by epa b energy and water efficient products and services such as energy star qualified and federal energy management program femp designated products identified by epa and the department of energy doe and c biopreferred and biobased designated products designated by the united states department of agriculture ii purchasing sustainable products and services identified by epa programs including a significant new alternative policy snap chemicals or other alternatives to ozonedepleting substances and high global warming potential hydrofluorocarbons where feasible as identified by snap b watersense certified products and services water efficient products c safer choice labeled products chemically intensive products that contain safer ingredients and d smartway transport partners and smartway products fuel efficient products and services iii purchasing environmentally preferable products or services that a meet or exceed specifications standards or labels recommended by epa that have been determined to assist agencies in meeting their needs and further advance sustainable procurement goals of this order or b meet environmental performance criteria developed or adopted by voluntary consensus standards bodies consistent with section d of the national technology transfer and advancement act of public law and omb circular iv acting as part of the implementation of planning requirements of section of this order until an agency achieves at least percent compliance with the biopreferred and biobased purchasing requirement in paragraph i of this subsection to a establish an annual target for the number of contracts to be awarded with biopreferred and biobased criteria and dollar value of biopreferred and biobased products to be delivered and reported under those contracts in the following fiscal year .
through ii diverting at least percent of nonhazardous solid waste including food and compostable material but not construction and demolition materials and debris annually and pursuing opportunities for netzero waste or additional diversion opportunities iii diverting at least percent of nonhazardous construction and demolition materials and debris and iv reducing or minimizing the quantity of toxic and hazardous chemicals and materials acquired used or disposed of particularly where such reduction will assist the agency in pursuing agency greenhouse gas emission reduction targets established in section of this order k implement performance contracts for federal buildings by i utilizing performance contracting as an important tool to help meet identified energy efficiency and management goals while deploying lifecycle costeffective energy efficiency and clean energy technology and water conservation measures ii fulfilling existing agency performance contracting commitments towards the goal of billion in federal performancebased contracts by the end of calendar year and iii providing annual agency targets for performance contracting for energy savings to be implemented in fiscal year and annually thereafter as part of the planning requirements of section of this order l promote electronics stewardship by establishing measuring and reporting by i ensuring procurement preference for environmentally sustainable electronic products as established in subsection i of this section ii establishing and implementing policies to enable power management duplex printing and other energyefficient or environmentally sustainable features on all eligible agency electronic products and iii employing environmentally sound practices with respect to the agency s disposition of all agency excess or surplus electronic productssec .
in implementing the policy set forth in section of this order the chair of ceq shall a in coordination with the director of omb establish a federal interagency sustainability steering committee steering committee that shall advise the director of omb and the chair of ceq on the performance of agency responsibilities under sections and of this order and shall include the federal chief sustainability officer referenced in section of this order and agency chief sustainability officers designated under sections and of this order b in coordination with the director of omb review and approve agencywide scope and and scope greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets developed under section of this order c in coordination with the director of omb prepare streamlined reporting metrics to determine each agency s progress under sections and of this order d review and evaluate each agency s plan prepared under section of this order e within days of the date of this order and thereafter as necessary after consultation with the director of omb issue implementing instructions or other guidance to direct agency implementation of this order other than instructions within the authority of the director of omb to issue under section of this order f within days of the date of this order prepare and issue revised guiding principles for both new and existing federal buildings including consideration of climate change resilience and employee and visitor wellness g revise as necessary and in coordination with the director of omb existing ceq guidance and implementing instructions on sustainable locations for federal facilities of september sustainable practices for designed landscapes of october as supplemented on october federal greenhouse gas accounting and reporting guidance revision of june and federal agency implementation of water efficiency and management provisions of executive order of july h within days of the date of this order prepare and issue guidance to assist agencies in the implementation of section of this order i identify annually based on total contract spending in the previous fiscal year as reported in the federal procurement data system the seven largest federal procuring agencies responsible for implementation of section b of this order j administer a presidential leadership award program to recognize exceptional and outstanding performance and excellence in agency efforts to implement this order and k establish and disband as appropriate temporary interagency working groups to provide recommendations to the chair of ceq associated with the goals of this order including gridbased green power data quality collection and reporting greenhouse gas emissions associated with the transportation of federal freight and cargo sustainability considerations in resilience planning agency supply chain climate vulnerability recycled content paper green infrastructure and carbon uptake accounting and wood productssec .
duties of the federal chief sustainability officer .
henceforth the federal environmental executive is reestablished as the federal chief sustainability officer and the office of the federal environmental executive is reestablished as the office of the chief sustainability officer for which the environmental protection agency shall provide funding and administrative support and that shall be maintained at ceq .
in implementing the policy set forth in section of this order the federal chief sustainability officer shall a monitor progress and advise the chair of ceq on agency goals in sections and of this order b chair convene and preside at quarterly meetings determine the agenda and direct the work of the steering committee c lead the development of programs and policies to assist agencies in implementing the goals of this order in coordination with doe epa the general services administration gsa and other agencies as appropriate d coordinate and provide direction to relevant existing workgroups through quarterly meetings to ensure that opportunities for improvement in implementation of this order are identified and addressed and e advise the chair of ceq on the implementation of this ordersec .
to ensure successful implementation of the policy established in section of this order the head of each principal agency shall a designate within days of the date of this order an agency chief sustainability officer who shall be a senior civilian officer of the united states compensated annually in an amount at or above the amount payable at level iv of the executive schedule and report such designation to the director of omb and the chair of ceq b assign the designated official the authority to represent the agency on the steering committee established under section of this order and perform such other duties relating to the implementation of this order within the agency as the head of the agency deems appropriate c prepare and distribute internally where appropriate performance evaluations of agency implementation of this order that reflect the contribution of agency services components bureaus and operating divisions to the goals of this order d ensure as soon as practicable after the date of this order that leases and contracts entered into after the date of this order for lessor or contractor operation of governmentowned buildings or vehicles facilitate the agency s compliance with this order e implement opportunities to improve agency fleet sustainability including vehicle acquisitions as established in section g of this order waiver authority and fleet data management practices by revising agency fleet management review and approval procedures to include the chief sustainability officers designated under this section and section of this order f consider the development of policies to promote sustainable commuting and workrelated travel practices for federal employees that foster workplace vehicle charging encourage telecommuting teleconferencing and reward carpooling and the use of public transportation where consistent with agency authority and federal appropriations law g ensure regional agency actions consider and are consistent with sustainability and climate preparedness priorities of states local governments and tribal communities where agency facilities are located h foster outstanding performance and excellence in agency efforts to implement this order through opportunities such as agency leadership award programs i continue implementation of formal environmental management systems ems where those systems have proven effective and deploy new emss where appropriate and j notwithstanding the limitations on implementation in section of this order apply where feasible and appropriate the strategies and plans to achieve the goals of this order in whole or in part with respect to fueling operation and management of tactical or emergency vehicles and to the activities and facilities of the agency that are not located within the united statessec .
within days of the date of this order to ensure successful implementation of the policy established in section of this order the head of each contributing agency shall designate an agency chief sustainability officer who shall be a senior civilian officer of the united states compensated annually in an amount at or above the amount payable at level iv of the executive schedule and report such designation to the director of omb and the chair of ceqsec .
duties of the agency chief sustainability officers .
the chief sustainability officers designated under sections and of this order shall be responsible for a ensuring agency policies plans and strategies implemented to achieve the goals of this order consider the role of agency regional facilities and personnel and are integrated into agency permitting and environmental review policies programs and planning b developing and implementing an agencywide strategic process that coordinates appropriate agency functions and programs to ensure that those functions and programs consider and address the goals of this order c reporting annually to the chair of ceq and director of omb a comprehensive inventory of progress towards the greenhouse gas emissions goals established in section of this order d representing the agency on the steering committee e convening quarterly meetings of agency bureaus commands or operating divisions that are responsible for the implementation of strategies necessary to meet the goals of this order f representing the agency in any requests to the chair of ceq and director of omb to amend or normalize a baseline for goals established in this order due to change of greater than percent as a result of agency space consolidation a change in mission tempo or improved data quality g providing plans including the plan prepared under section of this order reports information and assistance necessary to implement this order to the director of omb the chair of ceq and the federal chief sustainability officer and h performing such other duties relating to the implementation of this order as the head of the agency deems appropriatesec .
within days of the date of this order each epa and gsa regional office shall in coordination with federal executive boards established by the presidential memorandum of november the need for greater coordination of regional and field activities of the government dod and other agencies as appropriate convene regional interagency workgroups to identify and address a sustainable operations of federal fleet vehicles including identification and implementation of opportunities to use and share fueling infrastructure and logistical resources to support the adoption and use of alternative fuel vehicles including compatible vehicles zero emission and plugin hybrid vehicles and compressed natural gas powered vehicles b water resource management and drought response opportunities c climate change preparedness and resilience planning in coordination with state local and tribal communities and d opportunities for collective procurement of clean energy to satisfy energy demand for multiple agency buildingssec .
within days of the date of this order the office of personnel management in coordination with doe gsa epa and other agencies as appropriate shall a consider the establishment of a dedicated federal occupational series for sustainability professionals and relevant positions that directly impact the achievement of federal sustainability goals and if appropriate prepare and issue such occupational series and b initiate the inclusion of environmental sustainability and climate preparedness and resilience into federal leadership and educational programs in courses and training delivered through electronic learning in classroom settings and residential centers particularly developmental training for senior executive service and personnelsec .
agency strategic sustainability performance plan .
beginning in june and continuing through fiscal year the head of each principal agency shall develop implement and annually update an integrated strategic sustainability performance plan plan based on guidance prepared by the chair of ceq under section of this order .
b executive order of october presidential memorandum of december implementation of energy savings projects and performancebased contracting for energy savings section of presidential memorandum of february driving innovation and creating jobs in rural america through biobased and sustainable product procurement and presidential memorandum of december federal leadership on energy management are revoked .
commentssuggestions the sustainability program area includes the latest guidance examples and information resources to aid federal facilities in developing and maintaining sustainable facilities and helping to develop and promote sustainable practices within their environmental programs or activitiesplease use the links below to quickly jump to the information area needed or scroll down to view all items .
please use the links above to quickly jump to the information area needed or scroll down to view all itemsback to top back to top back to top back to top back to top back to top back to top sustainable acquisition materials management practices workgroup hosted by gsa membership required .
by rachel chaputepa s sustainable materials management smm program represents a systemic approach to using and reusing materials more productively over their entire life cycles .
region would like to announce our regional award and certificate winners for three smm challenges and thank them for their great efforts and contributions toward improving our environment and our livesthe food recovery challenge frc partners pledge to improve their sustainable food management practices and report their results .
in region frc partners diverted tons of food from the landfill through their collective activitiesthe epa wastewise program encourages organizations to achieve sustainability in their practices and to reduce select industrial wastes .
participants demonstrate how they reduce waste practice environmental stewardship and incorporate sustainable materials management into their wastehandling processes .
before working in sustainable materials management she worked in indoor air programs and managed the asthma grants program for ten years .
additionally the impact of global climate change is addressed through local solutions thereby empowering the community to make a difference on the sustainability of our environmentthe environmental education project awarded in seeks to make lake county youth the environmental leaders of the community ultimately expanding lake county s capacity for environmental stewardship .
in past blogs we ve written about the water footprint of our food and ways that sustainable food management protects water resources .
epa is a partner in the local foods local places program which helps communities like allentown pennsylvania crisfield maryland and williamson west virginia stimulate economic development through local food enterpriseswith simple steps you can be a watersavvy home chef and still make mouths water at the dinner tableabout the author dr jennie saxe joined epa s midatlantic region in and works in the water protection division on sustainability programseditor s note the views expressed here are intended to explain epa policy .
no one deserves more credit than him for advancing the goals of sustainability .
this has prompted the current un secretary general ban kimoon to note that our struggle for global sustainability will be won or lost in cities today this is a flashing red lighttwenty years later maurice strong was key in organizing the rio earth summit .
since then he played a key role in many un activities helping to advance a more sustainable and resilient world .
after the earth summit strong continued to take a leading role in implementing the results of rio through dozens of international organizationsover his life time he strongly advanced the concept of sustainability .
today achieving the goal of sustainability is even more urgent .
it is here that epa can help shape and protect the future worldabout the author alan hecht is the director for sustainable development in epa s office of research and developmenteditor s note the views expressed here are intended to explain epa policy .
longterm recovery was a relatively new role for epa and involved providing assistance with sustainable community planning to make a community more sustainable and resilient to future disastersmy role in greensburg was to help fema develop the longterm community recovery plan which was completed after several months of work and quickly implemented eventually making greensburg arguably the greenest city in the countryin i was again assigned to work with fema in iowa on postdisaster sustainable longterm planning efforts .
fortunately then governor chet culver established a state government agency called the rebuild iowa office which spent considerable time immediately after the disaster working with fema to determine the longterm recovery needs of communitiesflooding in eastern iowa june learning from my experience in greensburg i started to reach out to various epa headquarters offices looking for assistance knowing there was no funding available from epa region to assist with the needed recovery planningi quickly found that epa s offices of sustainable communities and brownfields land revitalization were willing partners .
both provided funding to bring in technical experts on economic development transportation planning and sustainable urban designiowa city makes the most of epa s assistancethe iowa community that took most advantage of these resources was iowa city the state s fourth largest city and home to the university of iowa and a major medical center .
the flood gave them an opportunity to do just thatthis area renamed the riverfront crossings district includes an aging wastewater treatment plant recycling center animal shelter and various other underutilized properties many of which were impacted by the floodingdiagram from epa s enhancing sustainable communities with green infrastructure after conducting a retail and housing market analysis along with a transitoriented development study both commissioned by epa it was decided that this area could be transformed into a mixeduse pedestrian and transitfriendly neighborhood .
again utilizing epa funding contractors with expertise in sustainable urban planning initiated a process to develop conceptual plans for such a neighborhood .
a number of street improvement projects are also in the planning stagesthe old saying with disaster brings opportunity certainly couldn t be more applicable to the sustainable recovery efforts that rejuvenated iowa city after the flood of the author david doyle serves as the sustainable communities coordinator at epa region .
by dr alan d hecht and barb waltonlate last year columbia university economist jeffrey sachs pronounced the year of sustainable development reflecting the united nations efforts to identify goals and agree on greenhouse gas emission targets for the decades aheadthe increase in greenhouse gas emissions and anticipated yet unquantifiable impact on climate change is one of many major global trends that governments at all levels and corporations need to addressthe full suite of such global mega trends challenges all of us to find ways to achieve years of sustainable development epa the world environment center and the wilson center are hosting an earth day seminar april from to pm on mega trends to encourage discussion of the following joining us to share thoughts and lead the discussion will be jennifer turner of the wilson center banning garrett adjunct faculty at singularity university and terry yosie of the world environment centertogether we will share our views on such topics as projected trends and impacts from climate change extreme weather urban growth and energy land and water useepa has been leading the responsive to a number of such emerging issues notably to climate change the management of new chemical wastes such as endocrine disruptors and nanomaterials the evaluation of biofuels and the effectiveness of green infrastructure .
accordingly the agency has developed a set of principles and actions to advance energywater use in a more sustainable wayand on urban growth epa is attuned to the potential impact on human health and on disadvantaged communities .
epa has identified communities where it will work to respond to past present and future issue affecting society wellbeingthe challenge of achieving sustainable development requires multiagency cooperation businessgovernment partnerships and full public understanding of the potential impacts .
to prepare for earth day in and for years of sustainable development we need to we and our partners are meeting those challenges .
for more information please visit http wwwwilsoncenterorgeventpromotingyearssustainabilityrespondingtomegatrendsabout the authors alan d hecht is the director for sustainable development at epa .
throw in the building s easy access to subway and bus lines and it becomes easy to understand why via verde has been held up as a model for environmentally sustainable developmentas of today we can add the epa to the list of those who have officially recognized via verde s accomplishments .
a blog post by dr alan hecht director for sustainable development for epa s office of research and development was recently featured by the cynthia and george mitchell foundation .
six steps closer to a sustainable worldby dr alan d hecht addressing the problems of the century will require a combination of strategies including creative use of existing environmental policies and regulations innovative application of science and technology and collaboration among stakeholders read the postabout the author dr alan hecht is director for sustainable development office of research and development at the us environmental protection agency epa .
and for a country that is still pristine rainforest environmental data management will be critical for sustaining growth while preserving natural resourcesmy efforts focused on three main areas to build a strong data management foundation strategic data planning logistics and organization and implementing new softwarestechnologies .
building a highquality database of environmental information in suriname will allow land managers to preserve their amazing natural resources while still allowing for development opportunitieswith big environmental data suriname can achieve true sustainable development while preserving one of the world s few last intact rainforestsabout the author betty kreakie phd is a research ecologist for the us environmental protection agency s office of research and development in narragansett rhode island .
a few days ago i arrived in rio de janeiro brazil for the united nation s conference on sustainable development aka .
offers an important opportunity to consider anew the global challenge of sustainable development and to provide guidance and inspiration for the path ahead .
some of the issues we touched on included i think these concepts are integral to the notion of sustainability .
after all when we talk about environmental governance we are talking about the very real building blocks of a governance system that can make all the difference in the difference between the concept of environmental protection expressed as written law and the reality of cleaner air and water healthier people and a secure a future where these benefits can be sustained for future generationsand when we talk about environmental justice we are talking about the kind of social inclusion that allows us to reach an end state where no one s environmental health is compromised because of his or her race national origin or income level and all have equal access both to the environmental decisionmaking process and to a healthy environment in which to live learn and workto read more about environmental governance click here http ineceorgresourcefoundationabout the author scott fulton is the us environmental protection agency s general counseleditor s note the views expressed here are intended to explain epa policy .
by administrator lisa p jacksonthis week i join colleagues from across the us and around the world at the un conference on sustainable development .
on the anniversary of the un earth summit that set an early course for sustainability across the globe we are working to shape the next years of sustainable development with the help of governments businesses students nonprofits and global citizensour work will be focused on new strategies to reinvest in the health and prosperity of urban communities .
i will be sharing the stories of individuals and organizations that are implementing new environmental education programs and creating the green jobs of the future and we re preparing to unveil videos submitted through the youth sustainability challenge .
please send us your stories of sustainability this week on facebook and twitter using the hashtag epario so that we can share them with the worldeven if you can t be there in person i hope you will join online .
go to http to see and participate in all of the events being hosted by the us government and be a part of our efforts to build a better more sustainable and more prosperous futureabout the author lisa jackson is the administrator of the us environmental protection agencyeditor s note the views expressed here are intended to explain epa policy .
by assistant administrator michelle depassnext week epa will join people from across the us government to participate in the united nations conference on sustainable development or .
our team of experts will be engaged in governmenttogovernment negotiations while also connecting with partners from the us and around the world to identify steps we can take as individuals as institutions and as a global community to make our world more sustainable and is an opportunity to not only set a vision for the next years of sustainable development but also strengthen global cooperation at multiple levels including nonprofits and community organizations students of every age fortune companies and small businesses .
so when we think of sustainable development and environmental protection these are not the fads of the moment .
on may epa administrator lisa jackson blogged about the youth sustainability challenge .
this project challenged american youth to submit a video that shared what they are doing to encourage sustainability in their communities and to make an america built to lasttoday i am excited to share the winning videos best overall video a generation of energy georgetown energybest contribution to sustainability concepts everyday actions enduring resultsmost innovative approach operation gulliver internationalbest communication of sustainability carmel green teen microgrant programpopular choice award growthyou can watch all videos submitted at the youth sustainability challenge website http youthsustainabilitychallengegov .
what are you doing to make your community and the world more sustainable about the author lisa jackson is the administrator of the us environmental protection agencyeditor s note the views expressed here are intended to explain epa policy .
by administrator lisa p jacksonthis week i join colleagues from across the us and around the world at the un conference on sustainable development .
on the anniversary of the un earth summit that set an early course for sustainability across the globe we are working to shape the next years of sustainable development with the help of governments businesses students nonprofits and global citizensour work will be focused on new strategies to reinvest in the health and prosperity of urban communities .
i will be sharing the stories of individuals and organizations that are implementing new environmental education programs and creating the green jobs of the future and we re preparing to unveil videos submitted through the youth sustainability challenge .
please send us your stories of sustainability this week on facebook and twitter using the hashtag epario so that we can share them with the worldeven if you can t be there in person i hope you will join online .
go to http to see and participate in all of the events being hosted by the us government and be a part of our efforts to build a better more sustainable and more prosperous futureabout the author lisa jackson is the administrator of the us environmental protection agencyeditor s note the views expressed here are intended to explain epa policy .
sustainability is a relatively new discipline within the environmental and business fields .
sustainability at its simplest terms combines economics business social human environment and environmental science .
the goal of sustainability is to find a balanced approach that minimizes risks to these areas in order to maintain or enhance the quality of life in the future .
environmental sustainability is just a slightly redundant term for true sustainability as everything relies on the environment .
in order to major in environmental sustainability it is imperative to select a program offering ecology and environmental classesthe international society of sustainable professionals issp was formed in and has over members worldwide .
it would be difficult to find a field that does not embody the tenets of sustainability .
consumers are increasingly incorporating the sustainability of a product prior to choosing a product to purchase .
sustainability will continue to grow in order to meet these unique needssustainability is truly interdisciplinary and can be found under the umbrella of such disciplines as planning agriculture business law engineering technology environmental sciences environmental studies and biology .
sustainability can be further broken down into specialties such as business operations agriculture and government operations .
one area of sustainability that tends to be consistent across the disciplines is the identification and awareness of the associated environmental and human health impacts along the supply chain from raw materials to the final product .
the study of how policy or regulatory requirements affect the environment human health and economy is also under the field of sustainability .
the ultimate goal of sustainability is to enable an atmosphere for economic growth without adversely affecting the environment or human populationtitles within the sustainability field are wide and varied .
some common titles include sustainability coordinator sustainability manager sustainability director chief sustainability officer leed professional environmental specialist environmental scientist chemist urban planner transportation specialist project manager environmental manager procurement officer policy analyst business analyst environmental lawyer environmental engineer supply chain manager and health safety specialistlearn more about the various sustainability career fieldsmost of the top environmental colleges offer degrees in sustainability or focuses on sustainable principles .
a sustainability focused degree is available at the associates bachelor s master s and doctoral levels .
the higher level degrees offer greater flexibility and growth in a sustainable career .
auditing is usually at a lower cost because you will not receive official college credit but will expose you to the subject matter level of effort required and provide a sense of the teaching styles among the professorsaccording to the association for the advancement of sustainability in higher education aashe there are there is some consistency regarding the common coursework between the degree and certificate options .
undergraduate and graduate coursework includes ethics sustainable business energy systems chemistry sociology and biology .
their bachelors of art ba degree focuses on sustainability of environmental resources and social institutions while their bachelors of science bs degree focuses on sustainable use of environmental resources certificate coursework includes sustainable business technology energy systems policy and sociologyimportant points to consider are the length of time for degree completion and the amount of financial aid available to offset the costs .
sustainability as its own discipline is relatively new and most degree programs are offered in a traditional or combined traditional and online environment .
however some colleges have begun offering online sustainability degrees and the amounts of online programs are anticipated to grow in the future .
an example of an online graduate degree program has been provided belowthose wanting to advance their education in sustainable management but require maximum flexibility are typically drawn to an online master s degree in sustainable management .
some of the specific career titles a master s in sustainable management can lead to include energy analyst director of global environmental affairs green marketing consultant sustainable design specialist and environmental policy analyst just to name a fewschools in the country offering this program include important points to consider are the length of time for degree completion and the amount of financial aid available to offset the costs .
the cost associated with sustainability degrees and certificates range from a year to over a year depending on the school and degree being sought .
financial aid is available for sustainable degree programs for those that qualifyensure the school is accredited because most employers look at accreditation in addition to the actual degree obtained .
accreditation also ensures consistency regarding the common coursework between the degree and certificate optionsbelow are a few schools that offer sustainability focused degreesdegree associate of science sustainability coordinatorprogram focus sustainability studies and sciencestudy options traditionalschool website http wwwlaneccedusustainabilitysustainabilitycoordinatorprogram overview this degree will provide a solid foundation for students to begin their careers in the sustainability field or enter into a bachelor s degree programcourse requirements this degree requires credits which consist of foundation and core credits and credits towards electives and career technical educationadmission requirements the admission requirements include transcripts from high school or ged placement testing and meeting with an advisortuition the anticipated tuition costs are including books and miscellaneous fees eg .
lab technology etc degree bachelor of science in sustainabilityprogram focus sustainability studies and sciencestudy options traditional and onlineprogram overview this program focuses on teaching a solid foundation in sustainability and includes linking concepts to realworld problemsdegree bachelor of arts in sustainabilityprogram focus sustainability studies and sciencestudy options traditional and onlineschool website http wwwusdeduartsandsciencessustainabilityindexcfmprogram overview the program offers a solid foundation for students to understand current issues within the sustainability field and the problem solving skills to address themability to choose concentration yes with choices between natural sciences or social sciencescourse requirements this degree requires credits which consist of core credits and credits towards electives minor and majoradmission requirements the admission requirements include one of the three options achieve an act composite score of or above sat grade point average of at least scale or rank in the upper percent of their high school classtuition the anticipated tuition costs are per year not including books and miscellaneous fees eg .
lab technology etc degree masters of arts in biological sciences global sustainability program focus sustainability studies and sciencestudy options traditional and onlineschool website http webccsueducatalogmasterdegreeprogramscourse requirements this degree requires credits towards the majoradmission requirements the admission requirements include providing collegiate transcripts narrative personal statement letters of recommendation evaluation and application for admission .
lab technology etc may not be includeddegree masters of arts in sustainability studiesprogram focus sustainability studies and sciencestudy options traditional and onlineschool website http webccsueducatalogmasterdegreeprogramsprogram overview combines natural sciences social sciences and business in order for students to be able to identify problems and offer solutions to advance the field of sustainabilityability to choose concentration yescourse requirements this degree consist of courses towards the major .
lab technology etc degree doctoral degree in sustainable developmentprogram focus urban studies and planningstudy options traditionalschool website https sipacolumbiaeduacademicsprogramsphdinsustainabledevelopmentprogram overview the focus of this program is to provide the skills necessary for students to pursue policy and research opportunities within the sustainability fieldability to choose concentration yes .
at the same time specializing in sustainability and environmental compliance can set you apart develop a specialized area of expertise and help you make a positive impact on the worldgraduates of mba programs in sustainability and environmental compliance get a firm foundation in business administration and become experts on integrating sustainability concepts into business operations .
students will learn about the environmental challenges facing businesses and how to address themopportunities for mba holders specializing in sustainability and environmental compliance are expanding .
you ll help your organization comply with changing environmental laws and achieve sustainability goals in the most economically efficient way .
in short you ll be working to reconcile the needs of business and the environment and helping make business more sustainable from withinapplicants generally need a bachelor s degree from an accredited institution to be accepted into an mba program .
while experience in business or environmental studies is nt usually required taking business and sustainability courses as an undergraduate can increase your chances of admissionan online mba is a more convenient option than a traditional mba .
while class schedules for an online mba can be more flexible most programs require at least some scheduled sessionssouthern new hampshire university in manchester offers an online mba in sustainability and environmental compliance .
the gmat and gre are not required for admissionsouthern new hampshire university s international mba with a concentration in sustainability and environmental compliance prepares students to participate in the increasingly globalized economy .
most applicants are already working in business and pursue the mba to advance their careersas with the mba in sustainability and environmental compliance students learn best business practices how to assess and comply with environmental laws and regulations and how to address environmental problems while remaining profitable .
graduates will be able to navigate their multinational organizations through these differences to maintain a cohesive successful global enterprisethe international mba in sustainability and environmental compliance includes foundational business courses .
they may work for large corporations smaller environmental consulting firms renewable energy and sustainability trade associations and environmental nonprofitsthe increasing globalized economy means that people with international mbas are in particularly high demand .
sustainability and green jobs are a growing industry that is taking the country by storm .
however all of these careers focus on providing sufficient amounts of energy for today s world without undermining environmental integrity or draining future resourcesthough the words sustainability and green often invoke the idea of environmental scientists this narrow view does not accurately represent the diversity of the field .
while these scientific careers are certainly part of the industry there are many other options for those seeking a sustainability job or green profession .
in fact many sustainability careers are often focused on helping organizations and companies run more efficiently thereby increasing their profits pleasing their customer base and creating a sense of well being among the communitythe employment conditions in sustainability careers and other green jobs vary considerably from position to position .
because this industry addresses a diverse amount of issues one sustainability worker may work in an office while another may work in a more industrial environment while yet another may spend the majority of their time outdoors .
if you re looking for a field that offers diverse options then sustainable careers and green jobs may be a perfect place to lookrelated what is sustainability though the outlook of each career path will vary on the whole sustainability careers are growing rapidly .
sustainability is a burgeoning industry that is growing as technology advances and the world s usual natural resources become more and more scarce .
green jobs and careers in sustainability are also beginning to replace jobs that once existed in nowdead industries resulting in a rapid growth rateuse the search box below to find all the sustainable and green job listings in our job boardpost to environmentalscienceorg and job boards with one submissionas our population becomes more environmentally aware a host of job opportunities in the sustainability and green jobs industry are becoming available .
from sustainable agriculture to green business to conservation and nature jobs all employees have some core tasks and values in common senior sustainability and green job roles are similar to other management roles with one key difference these experienced professionals place environmentally sustainable solutions at the core of their business strategy .
careers do vary widely depending on the job however most senior sustainability professionals will be asked to perform the following tasks at some point in their career find you green job now there are many different career options in the sustainability and green jobs industry .
a ms in biotechnology degree is great place to start your research or simply a sustainability degreesearch and compare the salaries of various environmental science careers around the united states by city and state .
they system is designed to create a more sustainable and ecologically friendly system of managing both woodlands and agricultural crops .
they may work developing models to enhance accuracy and quality of forecasting or in education teaching children and adults about the importance of air quality and control of substances potentially damaging to public health or the environmentlearn more about how to become an air quality forecaster aquarists care for marine life and sustain the exhibits at aquariums in many different capacities such as feeding the animals interacting with them cleaning habitats maintaining machinery designing exhibits and educating visitors .
with a specialization in aquatic biology many doors will be open to youlearn more about how to become an aquatic biologist in the race towards sustainability a number of green jobs have arisen in the last few years .
since industrial processes use a lot of electricity chemical engineers play an important role in creating a sustainable futurelearn more about how to become a chemical engineer a director of sustainability also known as a chief sustainability officer is a highlevel corporate role concerning the organization s sustainable practice .
their role involves monitoring the environmental impact of their industry and their business as well as ensuring compliance organizationwide through policy and ultimately improve performancelearn more about how to become a director sustainability ecotourism is a growth area of the global travel experience .
an ecotourism guide is essentially a vacation tour who organizes trips and talks to talk about local environments ecology how to be an environmentally conscious traveler and encourages sustainability .
if you like the idea of helping pioneer the clean energy economy solar engineering can be a rewarding careerlearn more about how to become a solar engineer sustainability program coordinators are vital for the design implementation and logistics of an organization s sustainability program .
their skills are practical requiring a broad knowledge of sustainability issues but with an understanding of the processes of business decisions costing human resources and the organization s scope also .
they thrive on problemsolving and enjoy the planning processlearn more about how to become a sustainability program coordinator sustainability specialists are part of a growing need for government and corporate sustainability .
they may also be involved in outreach activities such as local clean uplearn more about how to become a sustainability specialist turf scientists are educated ground keeping specialists that maintain huge expanses of grass across the seasons .
sustainability isn t part of our work it s a guiding influence for all of our work .
learn more about what epa is doing and what you can dolearn about sustainability research grants and scientific tools to support sustainable decision makingsearch epa programs tools models and other resources that promote sustainabilitycheck out the green infrastucture wizardlearn about the green check tag for federal green purchasingexitcontact us to ask a question provide feedback or report a problemlast updated on october .
we are the uk government s independent adviser on sustainable development .
through advocacy advice and appraisal we help put sustainable development at the heart of government policy the concept of sustainable development can be interpreted in many different ways but at its core is an approach to development that looks to balance different and often competing needs against an awareness of the environmental social and economic limitations we face as a societyall too often development is driven by one particular need without fully considering the wider or future impacts .
living within our environmental limits is one of the central principles of sustainable development .
one implication of not doing so is climate changebut the focus of sustainable development is far broader than just the environment .
sustainable development is about finding better ways of doing things both for the future and the present .
we might need to change the way we work and live now but this does nt mean our quality of life will be reduceda sustainable development approach can bring many benefits in the short to medium term for example savings as a result of sdc scrutiny government has saved over by improving efficiency across its estatehealth transport instead of driving switching to walking or cycling for short journeys will save you money improve your health and is often just as quick and convenientthe way we approach development affects everyone .
sustainable development provides an approach to making better decisions on the issues that affect all of our lives .
by encouraging more sustainable food supply chains we can ensure the uk has enough food for the longterm future .
however to achieve sustainability in the uk we believe the government needs to take the lead .
the sdc s job is to help make this happen and we do it through a mixture of scrutiny advice and building organisational capacity for sustainable development find out more about our ways of working the history of sd .
the outcome document the future we want inter alia set out a mandate to establish an open working group to develop a set of sustainable development goals for consideration and appropriate action by the general assembly at its session .
poverty eradication is the greatest global challenge facing the world today and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development .
poverty eradication changing unsustainable and promoting sustainable patterns of consumption and production and protecting and managing the natural resource base of economic and social development are the overarching objectives of and essential requirements for sustainable development .
people are at the centre of sustainable development and in this regard promised to strive for a world that is just equitable and inclusive and committed to work together to promote sustained and inclusive economic growth social development and environmental protection and thereby to benefit all in particular the children of the world youth and future generations of the world without distinction of any kind such as age sex disability culture race ethnicity origin migratory status religion economic or other status .
it also reaffirmed the commitment to fully implement the rio declaration agenda the programme for the further implementation of agenda the plan of implementation of the world summit on sustainable development johannesburg plan of implementation and the johannesburg declaration on sustainable development the programme of action for the sustainable development of small island developing states barbados programme of action and the mauritius strategy for the further implementation of the programme of action for the sustainable development of small island developing states .
planet earth and its ecosystems are our home and that mother earth is a common expression in a number of countries and regions and noted that some countries recognize the rights of nature in the context of the promotion of sustainable development .
it acknowledged the natural and cultural diversity of the world and recognized that all cultures and civilizations can contribute to sustainable development .
recognized that each country faces specific challenges to achieve sustainable development .
reaffirmed the commitment to strengthen international cooperation to address the persistent challenges related to sustainable development for all in particular in developing countries .
in this regard it reaffirmed the need to achieve economic stability sustained economic growth the promotion of social equity and the protection of the environment while enhancing gender equality women s empowerment and equal employment for all and the protection survival and development of children to their full potential including through education .
developing countries need additional resources for sustainable development .
there is a need for significant mobilization of resources from a variety of sources and the effective use of financing in order to promote sustainable development .
affirms the commitment to reinvigorating the global partnership for sustainable development and to mobilizing the necessary resources for its implementation .
the report of the intergovernmental committee of experts on sustainable development financing will propose options for a sustainable development financing strategy .
good governance and the rule of law at the national and international levels are essential for sustained inclusive and equitable economic growth sustainable development and the eradication of poverty and hunger .
reaffirmed that there are different approaches visions models and tools available to each country in accordance with its national circumstances and priorities to achieve sustainable development in its three dimensions which is our overarching goal .
the implementation of sustainable development goals will depend on a global partnership for sustainable development with the active engagement of governments as well as civil society the private sector and the united nations system .
sustainable development goals are accompanied by targets and will be further elaborated through indicators focused on measurable outcomes .
these goals constitute an integrated indivisible set of global priorities for sustainable development .
the goals and targets integrate economic social and environmental aspects and recognize their interlinkages in achieving sustainable development in all its dimensions .
end hunger achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture by end hunger and ensure access by all people in particular the poor and people in vulnerable situations including infants to safe nutritious and sufficient food all year round by end all forms of malnutrition including achieving by the internationally agreed targets on stunting and wasting in children under five years of age and address the nutritional needs of adolescent girls pregnant and lactating women and older persons by double the agricultural productivity and the incomes of smallscale food producers particularly women indigenous peoples family farmers pastoralists and fishers including through secure and equal access to land other productive resources and inputs knowledge financial services markets and opportunities for value addition and nonfarm employment by ensure sustainable food production systems and implement resilient agricultural practices that increase productivity and production that help maintain ecosystems that strengthen capacity for adaptation to climate change extreme weather drought flooding and other disasters and that progressively improve land and soil quality by maintain genetic diversity of seeds cultivated plants farmed and domesticated animals and their related wild species including through soundly managed and diversified seed and plant banks at national regional and international levels and ensure access to and fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge as internationally agreed increase investment including through enhanced international cooperation in rural infrastructure agricultural research and extension services technology development and plant and livestock gene banks to enhance agricultural productive capacity in developing countries in particular in least developed countries .
ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all by ensure that all girls and boys complete free equitable and quality primary and secondary education leading to relevant and effective learning outcomes by ensure that all girls and boys have access to quality early childhood development care and preprimary education so that they are ready for primary education by ensure equal access for all women and men to affordable quality technical vocational and tertiary education including university by increase by x the number of youth and adults who have relevant skills including technical and vocational skills for employment decent jobs and entrepreneurship by eliminate gender disparities in education and ensure equal access to all levels of education and vocational training for the vulnerable including persons with disabilities indigenous peoples and children in vulnerable situations by ensure that all youth and at least x of adults both men and women achieve literacy and numeracy by ensure all learners acquire knowledge and skills needed to promote sustainable development including among others through education for sustainable development and sustainable lifestyles human rights gender equality promotion of a culture of peace and nonviolence global citizenship and appreciation of cultural diversity and of culture s contribution to sustainable development build and upgrade education facilities that are child disability and gender sensitive and provide safe nonviolent inclusive and effective learning environments for all by expand by x globally the number of scholarships for developing countries in particular ldcs sids and african countries to enrol in higher education including vocational training ict technical engineering and scientific programmes in developed countries and other developing countries by increase by x the supply of qualified teachers including through international cooperation for teacher training in developing countries especially ldcs and sids end all forms of discrimination against all women and girls everywhere eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls in public and private spheres including trafficking and sexual and other types of exploitation eliminate all harmful practices such as child early and forced marriage and female genital mutilations recognize and value unpaid care and domestic work through the provision of public services infrastructure and social protection policies and the promotion of shared responsibility within the household and the family as nationally appropriate ensure women s full and effective participation and equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of decisionmaking in political economic and public life ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights as agreed in accordance with the programme of action of the icpd and the beijing platform for action and the outcome documents of their review conferences undertake reforms to give women equal rights to economic resources as well as access to ownership and control over land and other forms of property financial services inheritance and natural resources in accordance with national laws enhance the use of enabling technologies in particular ict to promote women s empowerment adopt and strengthen sound policies and enforceable legislation for the promotion of gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls at all levelsgoal .
ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all by achieve universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all by achieve access to adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all and end open defecation paying special attention to the needs of women and girls and those in vulnerable situations by improve water quality by reducing pollution eliminating dumping and minimizing release of hazardous chemicals and materials halving the proportion of untreated wastewater and increasing recycling and safe reuse by x globally by substantially increase wateruse efficiency across all sectors and ensure sustainable withdrawals and supply of freshwater to address water scarcity and substantially reduce the number of people suffering from water scarcity by implement integrated water resources management at all levels including through transboundary cooperation as appropriate by protect and restore waterrelated ecosystems including mountains forests wetlands rivers aquifers and lakes by expand international cooperation and capacitybuilding support to developing countries in water and sanitation related activities and programmes including water harvesting desalination water efficiency wastewater treatment recycling and reuse technologies support and strengthen the participation of local communities for improving water and sanitation managementgoal .
ensure access to affordable reliable sustainable and modern energy for all by ensure universal access to affordable reliable and modern energy services increase substantially the share of renewable energy in the global energy mix by double the global rate of improvement in energy efficiency by by enhance international cooperation to facilitate access to clean energy research and technologies including renewable energy energy efficiency and advanced and cleaner fossil fuel technologies and promote investment in energy infrastructure and clean energy technologies by expand infrastructure and upgrade technology for supplying modern and sustainable energy services for all in developing countries particularly ldcs and sidsgoal .
promote sustained inclusive and sustainable economic growth full and productive employment and decent work for all sustain per capita economic growth in accordance with national circumstances and in particular at least per annum gdp growth in the leastdeveloped countries achieve higher levels of productivity of economies through diversification technological upgrading and innovation including through a focus on high value added and labourintensive sectors promote developmentoriented policies that support productive activities decent job creation entrepreneurship creativity and innovation and encourage formalization and growth of micro small and mediumsized enterprises including through access to financial services improve progressively through global resource efficiency in consumption and production and endeavour to decouple economic growth from environmental degradation in accordance with the framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and production with developed countries taking the lead by achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all women and men including for young people and persons with disabilities and equal pay for work of equal value by substantially reduce the proportion of youth not in employment education or training take immediate and effective measures to secure the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labour eradicate forced labour and by end child labour in all its forms including recruitment and use of child soldiers protect labour rights and promote safe and secure working environments of all workers including migrant workers particularly women migrants and those in precarious employment by devise and implement policies to promote sustainable tourism which creates jobs promotes local culture and products strengthen the capacity of domestic financial institutions to encourage and to expand access to banking insurance and financial services for all increase aid for trade support for developing countries particularly ldcs including through the enhanced integrated framework for ldcs by develop and operationalize a global strategy for youth employment and implement the ilo global jobs pactgoal .
build resilient infrastructure promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation develop quality reliable sustainable and resilient infrastructure including regional and transborder infrastructure to support economic development and human wellbeing with a focus on affordable and equitable access for all promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and by raise significantly industry s share of employment and gdp in line with national circumstances and double its share in ldcs increase the access of smallscale industrial and other enterprises particularly in developing countries to financial services including affordable credit and their integration into value chains and markets by upgrade infrastructure and retrofit industries to make them sustainable with increased resource use efficiency and greater adoption of clean and environmentally sound technologies and industrial processes all countries taking action in accordance with their respective capabilities enhance scientific research upgrade the technological capabilities of industrial sectors in all countries particularly developing countries including by encouraging innovation and increasing the number of r d workers per one million people by x and public and private r d spending facilitate sustainable and resilient infrastructure development in developing countries through enhanced financial technological and technical support to african countries ldcs lldcs and sids support domestic technology development research and innovation in developing countries including by ensuring a conducive policy environment for inter alia industrial diversification and value addition to commodities significantly increase access to ict and strive to provide universal and affordable access to internet in ldcs by .
reduce inequality within and among countries by progressively achieve and sustain income growth of the bottom of the population at a rate higher than the national average by empower and promote the social economic and political inclusion of all irrespective of age sex disability race ethnicity origin religion or economic or other status ensure equal opportunity and reduce inequalities of outcome including through eliminating discriminatory laws policies and practices and promoting appropriate legislation policies and actions in this regard adopt policies especially fiscal wage and social protection policies and progressively achieve greater equality improve regulation and monitoring of global financial markets and institutions and strengthen implementation of such regulations ensure enhanced representation and voice of developing countries in decision making in global international economic and financial institutions in order to deliver more effective credible accountable and legitimate institutions facilitate orderly safe regular and responsible migration and mobility of people including through implementation of planned and wellmanaged migration policies implement the principle of special and differential treatment for developing countries in particular least developed countries in accordance with wto agreements encourage oda and financial flows including foreign direct investment to states where the need is greatest in particular ldcs african countries sids and lldcs in accordance with their national plans and programmes by reduce to less than the transaction costs of migrant remittances and eliminate remittance corridors with costs higher than goal .
make cities and human settlements inclusive safe resilient and sustainable by ensure access for all to adequate safe and affordable housing and basic services and upgrade slums by provide access to safe affordable accessible and sustainable transport systems for all improving road safety notably by expanding public transport with special attention to the needs of those in vulnerable situations women children persons with disabilities and older persons by enhance inclusive and sustainable urbanization and capacities for participatory integrated and sustainable human settlement planning and management in all countries strengthen efforts to protect and safeguard the world s cultural and natural heritage by significantly reduce the number of deaths and the number of affected people and decrease by y the economic losses relative to gdp caused by disasters including waterrelated disasters with the focus on protecting the poor and people in vulnerable situations by reduce the adverse per capita environmental impact of cities including by paying special attention to air quality municipal and other waste management by provide universal access to safe inclusive and accessible green and public spaces particularly for women and children older persons and persons with disabilities support positive economic social and environmental links between urban periurban and rural areas by strengthening national and regional development planning by increase by x the number of cities and human settlements adopting and implementing integrated policies and plans towards inclusion resource efficiency mitigation and adaptation to climate change resilience to disasters develop and implement in line with the forthcoming hyogo framework holistic disaster risk management at all levels support least developed countries including through financial and technical assistance for sustainable and resilient buildings utilizing local materials implement the framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and production all countries taking action with developed countries taking the lead taking into account the development and capabilities of developing countries by achieve sustainable management and efficient use of natural resources by halve per capita global food waste at the retail and consumer level and reduce food losses along production and supply chains including postharvest losses by achieve environmentally sound management of chemicals and all wastes throughout their life cycle in accordance with agreed international frameworks and significantly reduce their release to air water and soil to minimize their adverse impacts on human health and the environment by substantially reduce waste generation through prevention reduction recycling and reuse encourage companies especially large and transnational companies to adopt sustainable practices and to integrate sustainability information into their reporting cycle promote public procurement practices that are sustainable in accordance with national policies and priorities by ensure that people everywhere have the relevant information and awareness for sustainable development and lifestyles in harmony with nature support developing countries to strengthen their scientific and technological capacities to move towards more sustainable patterns of consumption and production develop and implement tools to monitor sustainable development impacts for sustainable tourism which creates jobs promotes local culture and products rationalize inefficient fossil fuel subsidies that encourage wasteful consumption by removing market distortions in accordance with national circumstances including by restructuring taxation and phasing out those harmful subsidies where they exist to reflect their environmental impacts taking fully into account the specific needs and conditions of developing countries and minimizing the possible adverse impacts on their development in a manner that protects the poor and the affected communitiesgoal .
strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate related hazards and natural disasters in all countries integrate climate change measures into national policies strategies and planning improve education awareness raising and human and institutional capacity on climate change mitigation adaptation impact reduction and early warning implement the commitment undertaken by developed country parties to the unfccc to a goal of mobilizing jointly billion annually by from all sources to address the needs of developing countries in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and transparency on implementation and fully operationalize the green climate fund through its capitalization as soon as possible promote mechanisms for raising capacities for effective climate change related planning and management in ldcs including focusing on women youth local and marginalized communities by prevent and significantly reduce marine pollution of all kinds particularly from landbased activities including marine debris and nutrient pollution by sustainably manage and protect marine and coastal ecosystems to avoid significant adverse impacts including by strengthening their resilience and take action for their restoration to achieve healthy and productive oceans minimize and address the impacts of ocean acidification including through enhanced scientific cooperation at all levels by effectively regulate harvesting and end overfishing illegal unreported and unregulated iuu fishing and destructive fishing practices and implement sciencebased management plans to restore fish stocks in the shortest time feasible at least to levels that can produce maximum sustainable yield as determined by their biological characteristics by conserve at least per cent of coastal and marine areas consistent with national and international law and based on best available scientific information by prohibit certain forms of fisheries subsidies which contribute to overcapacity and overfishing and eliminate subsidies that contribute to iuu fishing and refrain from introducing new such subsidies recognizing that appropriate and effective special and differential treatment for developingand least developed countries should be an integral part of the wto fisheries subsidies negotiation by increase the economic benefits to sids and ldcs from the sustainable use of marine resources including through sustainable management of fisheries aquaculture and tourism increase scientific knowledge develop research capacities and transfer marine technology taking into account the intergovernmental oceanographic commission criteria and guidelines on the transfer of marine technology in order to improve ocean health and to enhance the contribution of marine biodiversity to the development of developing countries in particular sids and ldcs provide access of smallscale artisanal fishers to marine resources and markets ensure the full implementation of international law as reflected in unclos for states parties to it including where applicable existing regional and international regimes for the conservation and sustainable use of oceans and their resources by their parties goal .
protect restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems sustainably manage forests combat desertification and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss by ensure conservation restoration and sustainable use of terrestrial and inland freshwater ecosystems and their services in particular forests wetlands mountains and drylands in line with obligations under international agreements by promote the implementation of sustainable management of all types of forests halt deforestation restore degraded forests and increase afforestation and reforestation by x globally by combat desertification and restore degraded land and soil including land affected by desertification drought and floods and strive to achieve a landdegradation neutral world by ensure the conservation of mountain ecosystems including their biodiversity to enhance their capacity to provide benefits which are essential for sustainable development take urgent and significant action to reduce degradation of natural habitat halt the loss of biodiversity and by protect and prevent the extinction of threatened species ensure fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources and promote appropriate access to genetic resources take urgent action to end poaching and trafficking of protected species of flora and fauna and address both demand and supply of illegal wildlife products by introduce measures to prevent the introduction and significantly reduce the impact of invasive alien species on land and water ecosystems and control or eradicate the priority species by integrate ecosystems and biodiversity values into national and local planning development processes and poverty reduction strategies and accounts mobilize and significantly increase from all sources financial resources to conserve and sustainably use biodiversity and ecosystems mobilize significantly resources from all sources and at all levels to finance sustainable forest management and provide adequate incentives to developing countries to advance sustainable forest management including for conservation and reforestation enhance global support to efforts to combat poaching and trafficking of protected species including by increasing the capacity of local communities to pursue sustainable livelihood opportunitiesgoal .
promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development provide access to justice for all and build effective accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels significantly reduce all forms of violence and related death rates everywhere end abuse exploitation trafficking and all forms of violence and torture against children promote the rule of law at the national and international levels and ensure equal access to justice for all by significantly reduce illicit financial and arms flows strengthen recovery and return of stolen assets and combat all forms of organized crime substantially reduce corruption and bribery in all its forms develop effective accountable and transparent institutions at all levels ensure responsive inclusive participatory and representative decisionmaking at all levels broaden and strengthen the participation of developing countries in the institutions of global governance by provide legal identity for all including birth registration ensure public access to information and protect fundamental freedoms in accordance with national legislation and international agreements strengthen relevant national institutions including through international cooperation for building capacities at all levels in particular in developing countries for preventing violence and combating terrorism and crime promote and enforce nondiscriminatory laws and policies for sustainable developmentgoal .
strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the global partnership for sustainable developmentfinance strengthen domestic resource mobilization including through international support to developing countries to improve domestic capacity for tax and other revenue collection developed countries to implement fully their oda commitments including to provide of gni in oda to developing countries of which to leastdeveloped countries mobilize additional financial resources for developing countries from multiple sources assist developing countries in attaining longterm debt sustainability through coordinated policies aimed at fostering debt financing debt relief and debt restructuring as appropriate and address the external debt of highly indebted poor countries hipc to reduce debt distress adopt and implement investment promotion regimes for ldcstechnology enhance northsouth southsouth and triangular regional and international cooperation on and access to science technology and innovation and enhance knowledge sharing on mutually agreed terms including through improved coordination among existing mechanisms particularly at un level and through a global technology facilitation mechanism when agreed promote development transfer dissemination and diffusion of environmentally sound technologies to developing countries on favourable terms including on concessional and preferential terms as mutually agreed fully operationalize the technology bank and sti science technology and innovation capacity building mechanism for ldcs by and enhance the use of enabling technologies in particular ictcapacity building enhance international support for implementing effective and targeted capacity building in developing countries to support national plans to implement all sustainable development goals including through northsouth southsouth and triangular cooperationtrade promote a universal rulesbased open nondiscriminatory and equitable multilateral trading system under the wto including through the conclusion of negotiations within its doha development agenda increase significantly the exports of developing countries in particular with a view to doubling the ldc share of global exports by realize timely implementation of dutyfree quotafree market access on a lasting basis for all least developed countries consistent with wto decisions including through ensuring that preferential rules of origin applicable to imports from ldcs are transparent and simple and contribute to facilitating market accesssystemic issuespolicy and institutional coherence enhance global macroeconomic stability including through policy coordination and policy coherence enhance policy coherence for sustainable development respect each country s policy space and leadership to establish and implement policies for poverty eradication and sustainable developmentmultistakeholder partnerships enhance the global partnership for sustainable development complemented by multistakeholder partnerships that mobilize and share knowledge expertise technologies and financial resources to support the achievement of sustainable development goals in all countries particularly developing countries encourage and promote effective public publicprivate and civil society partnerships building on the experience and resourcing strategies of partnershipsdata monitoring and accountability by enhance capacity building support to developing countries including for ldcs and sids to increase significantly the availability of highquality timely and reliable data disaggregated by income gender age race ethnicity migratory status disability geographic location and other characteristics relevant in national contexts by build on existing initiatives to develop measurements of progress on sustainable development that complement gdp and support statistical capacity building in developing countries taking into account ongoing wto negotiations and wto doha development agenda and hong kong ministerial mandate .
log in sitemap skip to content text version contact us a sustainable community a vision of a sustainable community move your cursor across the images and read the statements below .
log in sitemap skip to content text version contact usthe government in england wants every school to be a sustainable school by .
sustainability offers schools a useful umbrella under which a range of initiatives and policies can be pursued in an integrated way click here to visit our archive pages of the dcsf sustainable schools website resourcesparticipation and student voice are an integral part of becoming a sustainable school reflecting the values of inclusion diversity identity equality participation and rightsother initiatives that support sustainable schoolsas a starting point you could try measuring your school s footprint in a fun way using our schools quizthe ecoschools award has integrated its criteria so that they fit neatly with sustainable schools .
the active citizenship component is that it is all driven by an action team that includes students representing their years and the the ecoschools programme is free and it makes tackling sustainable issues manageable and easy for all schools whether they are children s centres nurseries primary schools secondary schools or schools with special status .
log in sitemap skip to content text version contact usbelow you will find links to information resources and activities around sustainability sustainable development sustainability environmental network seed is a registered charity that identifies promotes enables and supports environmental education and education for sustainable development in the uk .
http wwwseedcoukoxfam sustainability resourceshttp tinyurlcomsuschoolsthe sustainable schools website helping schools to become more sustainablepractical actionfocuses on a whole range of sustainable issues including renewable energy and climate change .
search sustainability and then sustainable developmentwwwtescoukfairtrade foundationfilms reports and campaign resouceswwwfairtradeorguk .
sustainable development is the organizing principle for meeting human development goals while at the same time sustaining the ability of natural systems to provide the natural resources and ecosystem services upon which the economy and society depends .
sustainable development can be classified as development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generationswhile the modern concept of sustainable development is derived mostly from the brundtland report it is also rooted in earlier ideas about sustainable forest management and twentieth century environmental concerns .
it has been suggested that the term sustainability should be viewed as humanity s target goal of humanecosystem equilibrium homeostasis while sustainable development refers to the holistic approach and temporal processes that lead us to the end point of sustainability .
instead of holding climate change commitments and other sustainability measures as a drug to economic development turning and leveraging them into market opportunities will do greater good .
the economic development brought by such organized principles and practices in an economy is called managed sustainable development msd the concept of sustainable development has still to criticism including the question of what is to be sustained in sustainable development .
it has been argued weasel words that there is no such thing as a sustainable use of a nonrenewable resource since any positive rate of exploitation will eventually lead to the exhaustion of earth s finite stock .
citation needed sustainability can be defined as the practice of maintaining processes of productivity or human replacing resources used with resources of equal or greater value without degrading or endangering natural biotic systems .
sustainable development ties together concern for the carrying capacity of natural systems with the social political and economic challenges faced by humanity .
sustainability science is the study of the concepts of sustainable development and environmental science .
development has its roots in ideas about sustainable forest management which were developed in europe during the and centuries .
building upon the ideas of evelyn and french minister jeanbaptiste colbert von carlowitz developed the concept of managing forests for sustained yield .
one of the first uses of the term sustainable in the contemporary sense was by the club of rome in in its classic report on the limits to growth written by a group of scientists led by dennis and donella meadows of the massachusetts institute of technology .
describing the desirable state of global equilibrium the authors wrote we are searching for a model output that represents a world system that is sustainable without sudden and uncontrolled collapse and capable of satisfying the basic material requirements of all of its people .
following the club of rome report an mit research group prepared ten days of hearings on growth and its implication for the future roundtable press for the us congress the first hearings ever held on sustainable development .
citation needed in the international union for the conservation of nature published a world conservation strategy that included one of the first references to sustainable development as a global priority and introduced the term sustainable development .
the report included what is now one of the most widely recognised definitions of sustainable development .
since the brundtland report the concept of sustainable development has developed beyond the initial intergenerational framework to focus more on the goal of socially inclusive and environmentally sustainable economic growth .
in the un conference on environment and development published the earth charter which outlines the building of a just sustainable and peaceful global society in the century .
the action plan agenda for sustainable development identified information integration and participation as key building blocks to help countries achieve development that recognises these interdependent pillars .
it emphasises that in sustainable development everyone is a user and provider of information .
furthermore agenda emphasises that broad public participation in decision making is a fundamental prerequisite for achieving sustainable development .
under the principles of the united nations charter the millennium declaration identified principles and treaties on sustainable development including economic development social development and environmental protection .
broadly defined sustainable development is a systems approach to growth and development and to manage natural produced and social capital for the welfare of their own and future generations .
the term sustainable development as used by the united nations incorporates both issues associated with land development and broader issues of human development such as education public health and standard of living .
citation needed a study concluded that sustainability reporting should be reframed through the lens of four interconnected domains ecology economics politics and culture .
in september the united nations general assembly formally adopted the universal integrated and transformative agenda for sustainable development a set of sustainable development goals sdgs .
the goals are to be implemented and achieved in every country from the year to development or sustainability has been described in terms of three spheres dimensions domains or pillars ie .
also termed human ecology this broadens the focus of sustainable development to include the domain of human health .
fundamental human needs such as the availability and quality of air water food and shelter are also the ecological foundations for sustainable development addressing public health risk through investments in ecosystem services can be a powerful and transformative force for sustainable development which in this sense extends to all species .
environmental sustainability concerns the natural environment and how it endures and remains diverse and productive .
environmental sustainability requires society to design activities to meet human needs while preserving the life support systems of the planet .
this for example entails using water sustainably utilizing renewable energy and sustainable material supplies eg .
sustainability requires that human activity only uses nature s resources at a rate at which they can be replenished naturally .
inherently the concept of sustainable development is intertwined with the concept of carrying capacity .
theoretically the longterm result of environmental degradation is the inability to sustain human life .
citation needed integral elements for a sustainable development are research and innovation activities .
a telling example is the european environmental research and innovation policy which aims at defining and implementing a transformative agenda to greening the economy and the society as a whole so to achieve a truly sustainable development .
a promising direction towards sustainable development is to design systems that are flexible and reversible .
because left unaddressed the development of the commonly owned property will become impossible to achieve in a sustainable way .
so this topic is central to the understanding of creating a sustainable situation from the management of the public resources that are used for personal usesustainable agriculture consists of environment friendly methods of farming that allow the production of crops or livestock without damage to human or natural systems .
the concept of sustainable agriculture extends intergenerationally passing on a conserved or improved natural resource biotic and economic base rather than one which has been depleted or polluted .
elements of sustainable agriculture include permaculture agroforestry mixed farming multiple cropping and crop rotation .
citation needed numerous sustainability standards and certification systems exist including organic certification rainforest alliance fair trade utz certified bird friendly and the common code for the coffee community .
sustainable development may involve improvements in the quality of life for many but may necessitate a decrease in resource consumption .
issues of intergenerational equity irreversibility of environmental change uncertainty of longterm outcomes and sustainable development guide ecological economic analysis and valuation .
as early as the the concept of sustainability was used to describe an economy in equilibrium with basic ecological support systems .
in the economist edward barbier published the study the concept of sustainable economic development where he recognised that goals of environmental conservation and economic development are not conflicting and can be reinforcing each other .
a world bank study from concluded that based on the theory of genuine savings policymakers have many possible interventions to increase sustainability in macroeconomics or purely environmental .
the study interpreting sustainability in economic terms found three pillars of sustainable development interlinkage intergenerational equity and dynamic efficiency .
but gilbert rist points out that the world bank has twisted the notion of sustainable development to prove that economic development need not be deterred in the interest of preserving the ecosystem .
he writes from this angle sustainable development looks like a coverup operation .
the thing that is meant to be sustained is really development not the tolerance capacity of the ecosystem or of human societies .
but they did not want to hear about how things really are or what i find in my work a meta review in looked at environmental and economic valuations and found a lack of sustainability policies .
it has been suggested that intergenerational equity can be incorporated into a sustainable development and decision making as has become common in economic valuations of climate economics .
misum mistra center for sustainable markets based at stockholm school of economics aims to provide policy research and advice to swedish and international actors on sustainable markets .
misum is a crossdisciplinary and multistakeholder knowledge center dedicated to sustainability and sustainable markets and contains three research platforms sustainability in financial markets mistra financial systems sustainability in production and consumption and sustainable socioeconomic development .
citation needed sustainable energy is clean and can be used over a long period of time .
overall and in the long run sustainable development in the field of energy is also deemed to contribute to economic sustainability and national security of communities thus being increasingly encouraged through investment policies .
main article green manufacturing and distributed manufacturingone of the core concepts in sustainable development is that technology can be used to assist people meet their developmental needs .
technology to meet these sustainable development needs is often referred to as appropriate technology which is an ideological movement and its manifestations originally articulated as intermediate technology by the economist e f schumacher in his influential work small is beautiful .
osat has been proposed as a new model of enabling innovation for sustainable development .
sustainable transport has many social and economic benefits that can accelerate local sustainable development .
according to a series of reports by the low emission development strategies global partnership leds gp sustainable transport can help create jobs improve commuter safety through investment in bicycle lanes and pedestrian pathways make access to employment and social opportunities more affordable and efficient .
it also offers a practical opportunity to save people s time and household income as well as government budgets making investment in sustainable transport a winwin opportunitysome western countries are making transportation more sustainable in both longterm and shortterm implementations .
such as other states and nations have built efforts to translate knowledge in behavioral economics into evidencebased sustainable transportation policies .
citation needed the most broadly accepted criterion for corporate sustainability constitutes a firm s efficient use of natural capital .
this idea has been popularised by the world business council for sustainable development wbcsd under the following definition ecoefficiency is achieved by the delivery of competitively priced goods and services that satisfy human needs and bring quality of life while progressively reducing ecological impacts and resource intensity throughout the lifecycle to a level at least in line with the earth s carrying capacity desimone and popoff .
similar to the ecoefficiency concept but so far less explored is the second criterion for corporate sustainability .
citation needed both ecoefficiency and socioefficiency are concerned primarily with increasing economic sustainability .
however as dyllick and hockerts point out the business case alone will not be sufficient to realise sustainable development .
they point towards ecoeffectiveness socioeffectiveness sufficiency and ecoequity as four criteria that need to be met if sustainable development is to be reached .
citation needed casi global new york csr sustainability together lead to sustainable development .
sustainability as in effects towards human resources environment and ecology has to be measured within each department of the company .
http casiglobalusat the present time sustainable development can reduce poverty .
sustainable development reduces poverty through financial among other things a balanced budget environmental living conditions and social including equality of income means .
in sustainable architecture the recent movements of new urbanism and new classical architecture promote a sustainable approach towards construction that appreciates and develops smart growth architectural tradition and classical design .
it should be noted that sustainable architecture is predominantly relevant to the economics domain while architectural landscaping pertains more to the ecological domain .
citation needed a study concluded that social indicators and therefore sustainable development indicators are scientific constructs whose principal objective is to inform public policymaking .
the international institute for sustainable development has similarly developed a political policy framework linked to a sustainability index for establishing measurable entities and metrics .
the framework consists of six core areas international trade and investment economic policy climate change and energy measurement and assessment natural resource management and the role of communication technologies in sustainable developmentthe united nations global compact cities programme has defined sustainable political development in a way that broadens the usual definition beyond states and governance .
they have listed seven subdomains of the domain of politics this accords with the brundtland commission emphasis on development that is guided by human rights principles see above working with a different emphasis some researchers and institutions have pointed out that a fourth dimension should be added to the dimensions of sustainable development since the triplebottomline dimensions of economic environmental and social do not seem to be enough to reflect the complexity of contemporary society .
in this context the agenda for culture and the united cities and local governments uclg executive bureau lead the preparation of the policy statement culture fourth pillar of sustainable development passed on november in the framework of the world summit of local and regional leaders world congress of uclg held in mexico city .
this document inaugurates a new perspective and points to the relation between culture and sustainable development through a dual approach developing a solid cultural policy and advocating a cultural dimension in all public policies .
the circles of sustainability approach distinguishes the four domains of economic ecological political and cultural sustainability .
other organizations have also supported the idea of a fourth domain of sustainable development .
the network of excellence sustainable development in a diverse world sponsored by the european union integrates multidisciplinary capacities and interprets cultural diversity as a key element of a new strategy for sustainable development .
the fourth pillar of sustainable development theory has been referenced by executive director of imi institute at unesco vito di bari in his manifesto of art and architectural movement neofuturism whose name was inspired by the united nations report our common future .
the circles of sustainability approach used by metropolis defines the fourth cultural domain as practices discourses and material expressions which over time express continuities and discontinuities of social meaning .
the united nations conference on sustainable development uncsd also known as rio was the third international conference on sustainable development which aimed at reconciling the economic and environmental goals of the global community .
an outcome of this conference was the development of the sustainable development goals that aim to promote sustainable progress and eliminate inequalities around the world .
however few nations met the world wide fund for nature s definition of sustainable development criteria established in .
in a report for the us environmental protection agency stated while much discussion and effort has gone into sustainability indicators none of the resulting systems clearly tells us whether our society is sustainable .
at best they can tell us that we are heading in the wrong direction or that our current activities are not sustainable .
nevertheless a majority of authors assume that a set of well defined and harmonised indicators is the only way to make sustainability tangible .
however a more general criticism is coming from the project management community how can a sustainable development be achieved at global level if we can not monitor it in any single project .
the cubanborn researcher and entrepreneur sonia bueno suggests an alternative approach that is based upon the integral longterm costbenefit relationship as a measure and monitoring tool for the sustainability of every project activity or enterprise .
furthermore this concept aims to be a practical guideline towards sustainable development following the principle of conservation and increment of value rather than restricting the consumption of resources .
citation needed reasonable qualifications of sustainability are seen us green building council s usgbc leadership in energy and environmental design leed .
the goals presented by leed design goals are sustainable sites water efficiency energy and atmospheric emission reduction material and resources efficiency and indoor environmental quality .
although amount of structures for sustainability development is many these qualification has become a standard for sustainable building .
the sustainable development debate is based on the assumption that societies need to manage three types of capital economic social and natural which may be nonsubstitutable and whose consumption might be irreversible .
citation needed main page education for sustainable developmenteducation must be revisited in light of a renewed vision of sustainable human and social development that is both equitable and viable .
this vision of sustainability must take into consideration the social environmental and economic dimensions of human development and the various ways in which these relate to education an empowering education is one that builds the human resources we need to be productive to continue to learn to solve problems to be creative and to live together and with nature in peace and harmony .
when nations ensure that such an education is accessible to all throughout their lives a quiet revolution is set in motion education becomes the engine of sustainable development and the key to a better world higher education in sustainability across education streams including engineering finance supply chain and operations is gaining weightage .
multiple institutes including wharton columbia casi global new york offer certifications in sustainabilitycorporate s prefer employees certified in sustainability .
referencehttps wwwwhartonupenneduhttp wwwcolumbiaeduhttp casiglobalusit has been argued that since the the concept of sustainable development has changed from conservation management to economic development whereby the original meaning of the concept has been stretched somewhat .
in effect the conservationists were crowded out and superseded by the developersbut shifting the focus of sustainable development from conservation to development has had the imperceptible effect of stretching the original forest management term of sustainable yield from the use of renewable resources only like forestry to now also accounting for the use of nonrenewable resources like minerals .
thus environmental economist kerry turner has argued that literally there can be no such thing as overall sustainable development in an industrialised world economy that remains heavily dependent on the extraction of earth s finite stock of exhaustible mineral resources it makes no sense to talk about the sustainable use of a nonrenewable resource even with substantial recycling effort and use rates .
one critic has argued that the brundtland commission promoted nothing but a business as usual strategy for world development with the ambiguous and insubstantial concept of sustainable development attached as a public relations slogan the report on our common future was largely the result of a political bargaining process involving many special interest groups all put together to create a common appeal of political acceptability across borders .
since the publication of the report the ambiguous and insubstantial slogan of sustainable development has marched on worldwide .
circles of sustainability is a method for understanding and assessing sustainability and for managing projects directed towards socially sustainable outcomes .
it is intended to handle seemingly intractable problems such as outlined in sustainable development debates .
the method is mostly used for cities and urban settlementscircles of sustainability and its treatment of the social domains of ecology economics politics and culture provides the empirical dimension of an approach called engaged theory .
developing circles of sustainability is part of larger project called circles of social life using the same fourdomain model to analyze questions of resilience adaptation security reconciliation .
as evidenced by and the un habitat world urban forum in napoli and medellin sustainability assessment is on the global agenda .
however the more complex the problems the less useful current sustainability assessment tools seem to be for assessing across different domains economics ecology politics and culture .
circles of sustainability was developed to respond to those limitationsthe method began with a fundamental dissatisfaction with current approaches to sustainability and sustainable development which tended to treat economics as the core domain and ecology as an externality .
two concurrent developments provided impetus a major project in porto alegre and a united nations paper called accounting for sustainability briefing paper no .
the researchers developed a method and an integrated set of tools for assessing and monitoring issues of sustainability while providing guidance for project development .
in canada the green score city index was inspired by studying the un circle of sustainability .
it is also used by a number of cities across the world in different ways to manage major projects or to provide feedback on their sustainability profiles eg hyderabad johannesburg melbourne new delhi so paulo and tehran .
it is a method for understanding urban politics and urban planning as well as for conducting sustainability analysis and profiling sustainable developmentthe methodology is made available by un global compact cities programme for its engagement with its more than signatory cities .
in particular some of the innovating cities in the programme have influenced the development of the circles of sustainability method through their management of major projects some with intensity and others as a background feature .
the lengthy preparation to resettle was led by a local crosssectoral network group the vila chocolato sustainability network .
the project ensured sustainability was built into the relocation through changes such as setting up of recycling depots next to existing slums and developing a formal recycling sorting facility in the new site residencial nova chocolato linked to the garbagecollection process of the city an example of linking the subdomains of emission and waste and organization and governance and establishing a fully resourced early childhood centre in the new community .
the vila chocolato sustainability network group continues to meet and work with the community post the resettlement .
the circles of sustainability methodology became the basis for an integrated city project .
the commission report using the circles of sustainability methodology was published on the web in three french and is used by member cities as a guide to practice .
a workshop was held in new delhi july and senior planners from new delhi hyderabad and kolkata used the two of the assessment tools in the circles of sustainability toolbox to map the sustainability of their cities as part of developing their urbanregional plans .
since the cities programme and metropolis have worked together to refine the circles of sustainability method to use with their respective member cities .
a metropolis taskforce was charged with further developing the methodin the economist invited paul james director of the united nations global compact cities programme and chetan vedya director national institute of urban affairs india into a debate around the question of urban sustainability and metropolitan growth .
the circles of sustainability method now underpins that reorientation and pilot studies are being conducted in india south africa lebanon indonesia and elsewhere to refine the methodology for aid delivery in complex urban settingsthe circles of sustainability approach is explicitly critical of other domain models such as the triple bottom line that treat economics as if it is outside the social or that treat the environment as an externality .
circles of sustainability is a method for understanding and assessing sustainability and for managing projects directed towards socially sustainable outcomes .
it is intended to handle seemingly intractable problems such as outlined in sustainable development debates .
the method is mostly used for cities and urban settlementscircles of sustainability and its treatment of the social domains of ecology economics politics and culture provides the empirical dimension of an approach called engaged theory .
developing circles of sustainability is part of larger project called circles of social life using the same fourdomain model to analyze questions of resilience adaptation security reconciliation .
as evidenced by and the un habitat world urban forum in napoli and medellin sustainability assessment is on the global agenda .
however the more complex the problems the less useful current sustainability assessment tools seem to be for assessing across different domains economics ecology politics and culture .
circles of sustainability was developed to respond to those limitationsthe method began with a fundamental dissatisfaction with current approaches to sustainability and sustainable development which tended to treat economics as the core domain and ecology as an externality .
two concurrent developments provided impetus a major project in porto alegre and a united nations paper called accounting for sustainability briefing paper no .
the researchers developed a method and an integrated set of tools for assessing and monitoring issues of sustainability while providing guidance for project development .
in canada the green score city index was inspired by studying the un circle of sustainability .
it is also used by a number of cities across the world in different ways to manage major projects or to provide feedback on their sustainability profiles eg hyderabad johannesburg melbourne new delhi so paulo and tehran .
it is a method for understanding urban politics and urban planning as well as for conducting sustainability analysis and profiling sustainable developmentthe methodology is made available by un global compact cities programme for its engagement with its more than signatory cities .
in particular some of the innovating cities in the programme have influenced the development of the circles of sustainability method through their management of major projects some with intensity and others as a background feature .
the lengthy preparation to resettle was led by a local crosssectoral network group the vila chocolato sustainability network .
the project ensured sustainability was built into the relocation through changes such as setting up of recycling depots next to existing slums and developing a formal recycling sorting facility in the new site residencial nova chocolato linked to the garbagecollection process of the city an example of linking the subdomains of emission and waste and organization and governance and establishing a fully resourced early childhood centre in the new community .
the vila chocolato sustainability network group continues to meet and work with the community post the resettlement .
the circles of sustainability methodology became the basis for an integrated city project .
the commission report using the circles of sustainability methodology was published on the web in three french and is used by member cities as a guide to practice .
a workshop was held in new delhi july and senior planners from new delhi hyderabad and kolkata used the two of the assessment tools in the circles of sustainability toolbox to map the sustainability of their cities as part of developing their urbanregional plans .
since the cities programme and metropolis have worked together to refine the circles of sustainability method to use with their respective member cities .
a metropolis taskforce was charged with further developing the methodin the economist invited paul james director of the united nations global compact cities programme and chetan vedya director national institute of urban affairs india into a debate around the question of urban sustainability and metropolitan growth .
the circles of sustainability method now underpins that reorientation and pilot studies are being conducted in india south africa lebanon indonesia and elsewhere to refine the methodology for aid delivery in complex urban settingsthe circles of sustainability approach is explicitly critical of other domain models such as the triple bottom line that treat economics as if it is outside the social or that treat the environment as an externality .
bateson had tried to bridge the natureculture divide the majority of studies focused on investigating processes within the social domain only treating the ecosystem largely as a black box and assuming that if the social system performs adaptively or is well organised institutionally it will also manage the environmental resource base in a sustainable fashion .
ses theory incorporates ideas from theories relating to the study of resilience robustness sustainability and vulnerability eg .
the concept of resilience is a promising tool for analysing adaptive change towards sustainability because it provides a way for analysing how to manipulate stability in the face of changein order to emphasise the key requirements of a socialecological system for successful adaptive governance folke and colleagues contrasted case studies from the florida everglades and the grand canyon .
the concept of socialecological systems has been developed in order to provide both a promising scientific gain as well as impact on problems of sustainable development .
problems of sustainable development are intrinsically tied to the socialecological system defined to tackle them .
china was one of the first developing countries to implement a sustainable development strategy .
for china to develop sustainably environmental protection should be treated as an integral part of its economic policies .
environmentally friendly or environmentfriendly also referred to as ecofriendly naturefriendly and green are sustainability and marketing terms referring to goods and services laws guidelines and policies that claim reduced minimal or no harm upon ecosystems or the environment .
it is thus linked to environmental protection sustainability and integrated landscape managementenvironmental resource management is an issue of increasing concern as reflected in its prevalence in seminal texts influencing global sociopolitical frameworks such as the brundtland commission s our common future which highlighted the integrated nature of environment and international development and the worldwatch institute s annual state of the world reportsthe environment determines the nature of people animals plants and places around the earth affecting behaviour religion culture and economic practicesenvironmental resource management can be viewed from a variety of perspectives .
with the prevalence of environmental problems many economists embraced the notion that if environmental sustainability must coexist for economic sustainability then the overall system must permit identification of an equilibrium between the environment and the economy .
simply put carrying capacity refers to the maximum number of organisms a particular resource can sustain .
sustainability in environmental resource management involves managing economic social and ecological systems both within and outside an organizational entity so it can sustain itself and the system it exists in .
in context sustainability implies that rather than competing for endless growth on a finite planet development improves quality of life without necessarily consuming more resources .
sustainably managing environmental resources requires organizational change that instills sustainability values that portrays these values outwardly from all levels and reinforces them to surrounding stakeholders .
the end result should be a symbiotic relationship between the sustaining organization community and environmentmany drivers compel environmental resource management to take sustainability issues into account .
as an exceptionally powerful contributing factor to social and environmental change the modern organisation has the potential to apply environmental resource management with sustainability principals to achieve highly effective outcomes .
to achieve sustainable development with environmental resource management an organisation should work within sustainability principles including social and environmental accountability longterm planning a strong shared vision a holistic focus devolved and consensus decision making broad stakeholder engagement and justice transparency measures trust and flexibility .
whether it be a matter of ethics or just strategic advantage organizations are internalizing sustainability principles .
some of the world s largest and most profitable corporations are shifting to sustainable environmental resource management ford toyota bmw honda shell du port sta toil swiss re hewlettpackard and unilever among others .
an extensive study by the boston consulting group reaching business leaders from diverse regions job positions expertise in sustainability industries and sizes of organizations revealed the many benefits of sustainable practice as well as its viability .
it is important to note that though sustainability of environmental resource management has improved corporate sustainability for one has yet to reach the majority of global companies operating in the markets .
the three major barriers to preventing organizations to shift towards sustainable practice with environmental resource management are not understanding what sustainability is having difficulty modeling an economically viable case for the switch and having a flawed execution plan or a lack thereof .
therefore the most important part of shifting an organization to adopt sustainability in environmental resource management would be to create a shared vision and understanding of what sustainability is for that particular organization and to clarify the business case .
this has resulted in the public sector working collaboratively with other sectors including other governments private and civil to encourage sustainable natural resource management behaviours .
