Permaculture is a system of agricultural and social design principles centered around simulating or directly utilizing the patterns and features observed in natural ecosystems.
The word permaculture originally referred to "permanent agriculture",[1][2] but was expanded to stand also for "permanent culture", as it was understood that social aspects were integral to a truly sustainable system as inspired by Masanobu Fukuoka’s natural farming philosophy.It has many branches that include, but are not limited to, ecological design, ecological engineering, environmental design, and construction.
Permaculture also includes integrated water resources management that develops sustainable architecture, and regenerative and self-maintained habitat and agricultural systems modelled from natural ecosystems.
[3][4]Mollison has said: "Permaculture is a philosophy of working with, rather than against nature; of protracted and thoughtful observation rather than protracted and thoughtless labour; and of looking at plants and animals in all their functions, rather than treating any area as a single product system.
In 1929, Joseph Russell Smith added an antecedent term as the subtitle for Tree Crops: A Permanent Agriculture, a book which sums up his long experience experimenting with fruits and nuts as crops for human food and animal feed.
[6]  Smith saw the world as an inter-related whole and suggested mixed systems of trees and crops underneath.
This book inspired many individuals intent on making agriculture more sustainable, such as Toyohiko Kagawa who pioneered forest farming in Japan in the 1930s.
Yeomans introduced both an observation-based approach to land use in Australia in the 1940s and the Keyline Design as a way of managing the supply and distribution of water in the 1950s.Holmgren noted Stewart Brand’s works as an early influence to permaculture.
[8] Other early influences include Ruth Stout and Esther Deans, who pioneered no-dig gardening, and Masanobu Fukuoka who, in the late 1930s in Japan, began advocating no-till orchards and gardens and natural farming.
[9]In the late 1960s, Bill Mollison and David Holmgren started developing ideas about stable agricultural systems on the southern Australian island state of Tasmania.
[10] In their view, these methods were highly dependent on non-renewable resources, and were additionally poisoning land and water, reducing biodiversity, and removing billions of tons of topsoil from previously fertile landscapes.
They responded with a design approach called permaculture.
[10]Among some of the more recognizable names who received their original training within Mollison's PDC system would include Geoff Lawton and Toby Hemenway, each of whom have more than 25 years experience teaching and promoting permaculture as a sustainable way of growing food.
He has since worked internationally.By the early 1980s, the concept had broadened from agricultural systems design towards sustainable human habitats.
After Permaculture One, Mollison further refined and developed the ideas by designing hundreds of permaculture sites and writing more detailed books, such as Permaculture: A Designers Manual.
[citation needed] Mollison "encouraged graduates to become teachers themselves and set up their own institutes and demonstration sites.
[14]The three core tenets of permaculture are:[15][16][17]Permaculture design emphasizes patterns of landscape, function, and species assemblies.
Permaculture maximizes useful connections between components and synergy of the final design.
Permaculture design therefore seeks to minimize waste, human labor, and energy input by building systems, and maximizes benefits between design elements to achieve a high level of synergy.
Permaculture designs evolve over time by taking into account these relationships and elements and can evolve into extremely complex systems that produce a high density of food and materials with minimal input.
[20]The design principles, which are the conceptual foundation of permaculture, were derived from the science of systems ecology and study of pre-industrial examples of sustainable land use.
Permaculture draws from several disciplines including organic farming, agroforestry, integrated farming, sustainable development, and applied ecology.
[21] Permaculture has been applied most commonly to the design of housing and landscaping, integrating techniques such as agroforestry, natural building, and rainwater harvesting within the context of permaculture design principles and theory.
[citation needed]Twelve Permaculture design principles articulated by David Holmgren in his Permaculture: Principles and Pathways Beyond Sustainability:[22]Layers are one of the tools used to design functional ecosystems that are both sustainable and of direct benefit to humans.
A mature ecosystem has a huge number of relationships between its component parts: trees, understory, ground cover, soil, fungi, insects, and animals.
Because plants grow to different heights, a diverse community of life is able to grow in a relatively small space, as the vegetation occupies different layers.
There are generally seven recognized layers in a food forest, although some practitioners also include fungi as an eighth layer.
There are many forms of guilds, including guilds of plants with similar functions that could interchange within an ecosystem, but the most common perception is that of a mutual support guild.
Mutual support guilds are groups of plants, animals, insects, etc.
Plants may be grown for food production, draw nutrients from deep in the soil through tap roots, are nitrogen-fixing legumes, attract beneficial insects, and repel harmful insects.
When grouped together in a mutually beneficial arrangement, these plants form a guild.
See Dave Jacke's work on edible forest gardens for more information on other guilds, specifically resource-partitioning and community-function guilds.
An example of this is the coast; where the land and the sea meet, there is a particularly rich area that meets a disproportionate percentage of human and animal needs.
This idea is played out in permacultural designs by using spirals in herb gardens, or creating ponds that have wavy undulating shorelines rather than a simple circle or oval (thereby increasing the amount of edge for a given area).
[28]Zones intelligently organize design elements in a human environment based on the frequency of human use and plant or animal needs.
Frequently manipulated or harvested elements of the design are located close to the house in zones 1 and 2.
[29][page needed]Permaculture uses observation of nature to create regenerative systems, and the place where this has been most visible has been on the landscape.
There has been a growing awareness though that firstly, there is the need to pay more attention to the peoplecare ethic, as it is often the dynamics of people that can interfere with projects, and secondly that the principles of permaculture can be used as effectively to create vibrant, healthy and productive people and communities as they have been in landscapes.Domesticated animals are often incorporated into site design, ensuring the efficiency and productivity of the system.
[31]Animals, domestic or wild are a critical component of any wild or designed sustainable ecosystem.
[32] Some of the activities that contribute to the system include: foraging to cycle nutrients, clear fallen fruit, weed maintenance, spreading seeds, and pest maintenance.
A more specific explanation of how the animals can be used is seen in the chicken design.
Chickens can be used to scratch over the soil, thus breaking down the top soil and using the fecal matter as manure creating a sustainable system.
However, in the domestication of these animals, the complexity and elegance lie in an effectiveness and efficiency of the design, including factors like timing and habits to specific areas of a farm.
For example, animals require daily attention in a way that is much more demanding than plants.
[33]Agroforestry is an integrated approach of permaculture, which uses the interactive benefits from combining trees and shrubs with crops or livestock.
It combines agricultural and forestry technologies to create more diverse, productive, profitable, healthy and sustainable land-use systems.
[34] In agroforestry systems, trees or shrubs are intentionally used within agricultural systems, or non-timber forest products are cultured in forest settings.
[35]Forest gardening is a term permaculturalists use to describe systems designed to mimic natural forests.
Forest gardens, like other permaculture designs, incorporate processes and relationships that the designers understand to be valuable in natural ecosystems.
The terms forest garden and food forest are used interchangeably in the permaculture literature.
Numerous permaculturists are proponents of forest gardens, such as Graham Bell, Patrick Whitefield, Dave Jacke, Eric Toensmeier and Geoff Lawton.
Bell started building his forest garden in 1991 and wrote the book The Permaculture Garden in 1995, Whitefield wrote the book How to Make a Forest Garden in 2002, Jacke and Toensmeier co-authored the two volume book set Edible Forest Gardening in 2005, and Lawton presented the film Establishing a Food Forest in 2008.
[20][36][37]Tree Gardens, such as Kandyan tree gardens, in South and Southeast Asia, are often hundreds of years old.
It is not self-evident whether these tree gardens derived initially from experiences of cultivation and forestry, as is the case in agroforestry, or whether they derived from an understanding of forest ecosystems, as is the case for permaculture systems.
Permaculturalists may obscure the distinction of permaculture and agroforestry when they include existing and ancient systems of polycropping as examples of food forests.Food forests and agroforestry are parallel approaches that sometimes lead to similar designs.Hügelkultur is the practice of burying large volumes of wood to increase soil water retention.
During the rainy season, masses of buried wood can absorb enough water to sustain crops through the dry season.
[39][40]A natural building involves a range of building systems and materials that place major emphasis on sustainability.
Ways of achieving sustainability through natural building focus on durability and the use of minimally processed, plentiful or renewable resources, as well as those that, while recycled or salvaged, produce healthy living environments and maintain indoor air quality.The basis of natural building is the need to lessen the environmental impact of buildings and other supporting systems, without sacrificing comfort, health, or aesthetics.
Natural building primarily utilizes abundantly available natural materials (e.g., clay, rock, sand, straw, wood, reeds), and draws heavily on traditional architectural strategies from various climates across the world.
In addition to relying on natural building materials, the emphasis on the architectural design is heightened.
The orientation of a building, the utilization of local climate and site conditions, the emphasis on natural ventilation through design, fundamentally lessen operational costs and positively impact the environment.
Building compactly and minimizing the ecological footprint is common, as are on-site handling of energy acquisition, on-site water capture, alternate sewage treatment, and water reuse.
[citation needed] Most materials are sourced regionally, locally, or even on-site.
Natural builders also regularly combine different wall systems in a single building, making best use of different materials' thermal or water resistant properties, for example, where they are most needed in the structure.Rainwater harvesting is the accumulating and storing of rainwater for reuse before it reaches the aquifer.
[41] It has been used to provide drinking water, water for livestock, water for irrigation, as well as  other typical uses.
Rainwater collected from the roofs of houses and local institutions can make an important contribution to the availability of drinking water.
It can supplement the subsoil water level and increase urban greenery.
Water collected from the ground, sometimes from areas which are especially prepared for this purpose, is called stormwater harvesting.
[citation needed]Greywater is wastewater generated from domestic activities such as laundry, dishwashing, and bathing, which can be recycled on-site for uses such as landscape irrigation and constructed wetlands.
Greywater is largely sterile, but not potable (drinkable).
Greywater differs from water from the toilets, which is designated sewage or blackwater to indicate it contains human waste.
Blackwater is septic or otherwise toxic and cannot easily be reused.
There are, however, continuing efforts to make use of blackwater or human waste.
Additionally, the methane in humanure can be collected and used similar to natural gas as a fuel, such as for heating or cooking, and is commonly referred to as biogas.
Some of the simplest forms of humanure use include a composting toilet or an outhouse or dry bog surrounded by trees that are heavy feeders which can be coppiced for wood fuel.
[citation needed]In agriculture and gardening, mulch is a protective cover placed over the soil.
These include absorbing rainfall, reducing evaporation, providing nutrients, increasing organic matter in the soil, feeding and creating habitat for soil organisms, suppressing weed growth and seed germination, moderating diurnal temperature swings, protecting against frost, and reducing erosion.
Sheet mulching is an agricultural no-dig gardening technique that attempts to mimic natural processes occurring within forests.
[42][43][page needed]Sheet mulch serves as a "nutrient bank," storing the nutrients contained in organic matter and slowly making these nutrients available to plants as the organic matter slowly and naturally breaks down.
It also improves the soil by attracting and feeding earthworms, slaters and many other soil micro-organisms, as well as adding humus.
Earthworms "till" the soil, and their worm castings are among the best fertilizers and soil conditioners.
Sheet mulching can be used to reduce or eliminate non-desired plants by starving them of light, and can be more advantageous than using herbicide or other methods of control.
However, it has been shown that when grazing is modeled after nature, the opposite effect can be seen.
MIRG can be used with cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, chickens, rabbits, geese, turkeys, ducks, and other animals depending on the natural ecological community that is being mimicked.
Allan Savory's holistic management technique has been likened to "a permaculture approach to rangeland management".
[49][50][51][52][53][54][55]Keyline design is a technique for maximizing the beneficial use of water resources of a piece of land developed in Australia by farmer and engineer P. A. Yeomans.
The Keyline refers to a specific topographic feature linked to water flow which is used in designing the drainage system of the site.
He has successfully grown several varieties of fruiting trees at altitudes (approximately 9,000 feet (2,700 m)) far above their normal altitude, temperature, and snow load ranges.
The point of having unpruned branches, he notes, was that the longer (more naturally formed) branches bend over under the snow load until they touched the ground, thus forming a natural arch against snow loads that would break a shorter, pruned, branch.
[citation needed]Masanobu Fukuoka, as part of early experiments on his family farm in Japan, experimented with no-pruning methods, noting that he ended up killing many fruit trees by simply letting them go, which made them become convoluted and tangled, and thus unhealthy.
[58][59][page needed] Then he realised this is the difference between natural-form fruit trees and the process of change of tree form that results from abandoning previously-pruned unnatural fruit trees.
[58][60][page needed]  He concluded that the trees should be raised all their lives without pruning, so they form healthy and efficient branch patterns that follow their natural inclination.
This is part of his implementation of the Tao-philosophy of Wú wéi translated in part as no-action (against nature), and he described it as no unnecessary pruning, nature farming or "do-nothing" farming, of fruit trees, distinct from non-intervention or literal no-pruning.
Permaculture allows creativity and innovation in farming.
The action of permaculture looks and all becoming consciously involved in the process of producing and ensuring abundant food nearby, problem on malnutrition caused by the world hunger problem will inevitably lessen.
These statements were largely accepted at face value within the permaculture community.
"In his books Sustainable Freshwater Aquaculture and Farming in Ponds and Dams, Nick Romanowski expresses the view that the presentation of aquaculture in Bill Mollison's books is unrealistic and misleading.
[67]Greg Williams argues that forests cannot be more productive than farmland because the net productivity of forests declines as they mature due to ecological succession.
[68] Proponents of permaculture respond that this is true only if one compares data between woodland forest and climax vegetation, but not when comparing farmland vegetation with woodland forest.
[citation needed] For example, ecological succession generally results in a forest's productivity rising after its establishment only until it reaches the woodland state (67% tree cover), before declining until full maturity.
Permaculture VisionsPermaculture Training Online PioneersThe Permaculture garden is more than an organic garden.
Although organic food production often has many innovative elements, a Permaculture designed garden joins each of the elements into functional relationships.
Also, the foundation of permaculture design lies in the ethics.
The ethics are both care of earth and care of people.Permaculture design is mindful of our relationship with our environment.
We see we are living in a period of energy resource limits.
Whilst a few wealthy people have the resources to adapt to climate change, most of the world’s people cannot.
Rich people can move, get air-conditioning,  and import truck-loads of water.
It is energy-wise and collaborative to minimise the impact of a culture on the surrounding environment.
A good permaculture design has great potential.
The biggest Permaculture site in the world, The Chikukwa Project, has helped the whole community.The permaculture environment is the result of a caring lifestyle.You will see:Permaculture uses organic gardening and farming practices but it goes beyond.
It integrates the garden and home to create a lifestyle that impacts less on the environment.There is a significant difference between closed and open food-production systems.
In a truly closed system (one in vacuum or in space) energy is not lost it is simply transferred from one being or element to another.
In a permaculture system, (which can never be fully closed), energy is ideally used by one element effectively and passed on for the benefit of the next before it leaves the system.Organic Farming promotes the use of natural fertilisers, making use of the natural carbon cycle so that waste from plants becomes the food (fertiliser) of another.
In organic farming however, as with ALL farming, minerals are being lost from the farm every time a truck load of produce is carted to market.The Ideal Permaculture ‘Farm’ brings production of food closer to consumers and the consumer’s wastes back into the cycle.
It also reduces the energy wasted in transporting the foods by producing the foods where the people are.
In permaculture, the people contribute in their daily life toward the production of their food and other needs.There will be times when a permaculture system is not strictly organic:Essentially Permaculture is trying to close the energy loop by optimising what we have.This is not usually due to an intentional use of pesticides, but often due to the use of a by-product that would otherwise be wasted.
We could use old shoes as pots for plants, an old truck tyre/tire to hold the edges of a pond.
For example: At Silk Farm we use recycled oil (to make fire starters) and the oil cans (for our simple worm-farm towers) from a non-certified organic restaurant who sometimes uses leaves and fruits from our garden.
When we design well, the permaculture system can act as a cleanser or processing agent.
Good permaculture design will aim to have a better output than input.
Organic gardening may not have checks to reduce the system’s impact on the wider natural system.Build you knowledge about permaculture by doing a permaculture design course with us.
 “Ethics is nothing else than reverence for life.
“        – Albert Schweitzer “Let me give you a definition of ethics: It is good to maintain and further life, it is bad to damage and destroy life.
– Albert SchweitzerWhat better place to start than to define exactly what ethics are, then we can proceed to look at why we need them, and what they’re doing in an ecological design system such as Permaculture.Ethics is one of those terms that people more-or-less know the meaning of, but can’t exactly define.
Put simply, they keep people from engaging in conduct that is wrong, it’s as simple as that.
While trying to define what is right and wrong seems to defy academics and philosophers, who tend to conclude that what is right or wrong shifts and changes with society, such abstract intellectual posturing serves no purpose in the practical design system of permaculture, which deals with real-life scientifically quantifiable systems.
“Relativity applies to physics, not ethics”        – Albert Einstein“A man is ethical only when life, as such, is sacred to him, that of plants and animals as that of his fellow men, and when he devotes himself helpfully to all life that is in need of help.”        – Albert SchweitzerAs a basic definition, Permaculture is a holistic design system for creating sustainable human settlements and food production systems.
It is a movement concerned with sustainable, environmentally sound land use and the building of stable communities, through the harmonious interrelationship of humans, plants, animals and the Earth.By this very definition, this system necessitates that our conduct is focussed on the good of the planet, Nature and the people.
What is good or bad for living systems is objective scientific fact that can be observed, measured and the results readily reproduced, it is not idle philosophy abstracted from reality and relegated to the towers of academia.“Any living system, when viewed scientifically, has required inputs which sustain life within that system”Any living system, when viewed scientifically, has required inputs which sustain life within that system.
A plant needs sunlight, air, water and soil to sustain it.
If we impair these inputs in any way, we harm plant life.
When we extend this example to animal life (and yes, that includes us humans too!
), it’s works exactly the same way, just with greater complexity.If people’s actions are detrimental to the inputs required to sustain life in a living system, or if the actions are directly harmful to the living system itself, that is, the organisms within it, then it’s unethical, period.Now, if anyone’s wondering, “hey, what about eating plants and animals, isn’t that harming life”, there’s a simple answer to that tired old question, a basic axiom of biology, which is “life feeds off life”.
From bacteria upwards, life feeds on other life forms to sustain life.
There is a qualitative difference between the cessation of life (plants included) to sustain life, and the pointless destruction of life.
If you eat a lettuce to stay alive, that’s understandable, but if you dump radioactive mining tailings into a river and cause untold destruction of life, that’s completely unjustified and unethical!
It’s essentially a peripheral human activity primarily aimed at deriving financial profit, secondarily as a means of providing materials for creating weapons of mass destruction and for energy generation, the absolute necessity both of which is questionable…There is a stark and glaring difference between the taking of life to sustain life, and the taking of life to support a lifestyle!Actions, whether ethical or unethical, can also be a matter of degrees, there is a quantitative difference between what is sustainable and what is destructive folly.A good example is the harvesting of trees.
The other approach is that we can clear-fell forests to “grow food” and in the process, disrupt the natural systems which precipitate rainfall, trigger soil erosion and salinity, and end up creating a situation where there is insufficient rainfall to grow food, and soil becomes unusable or gets washed away.So, therefore, from a Permaculture perspective, ethical actions are simply those that support life, and unethical ones are ones that harm or destroy life needlessly.Permaculture therefore starts with ethics, which form the very foundations of this design system, and all actions we undertake in Permaculture activities are strictly always in agreement with the ethics of Permaculture.
The Earth is the very thing that sustains us, it provides us with all the essentials that keeps us alive – air, water, food, shelter – and it is the only source of these essentials, we can’t get them from anywhere else!
We depend on the Earth and all the living systems on the planet (which, incidentally, are all interconnected in a complicated, interdependent web of life) for our survival.Taking care of the Earth’s systems which keep us alive would logically be seen as “enlightened self-interest”, doing what is right to ensure one’s own survival – not polluting the air we breathe, not poisoning the water we drink, and not destroying the land which provides our sustenance.“Care of the Earth” includes all living and non-living things, such as animals and plants, as well as land, water and air.
When one is affected, all are affected.Caring for the Earth also means caring for the soil.
Life is dependent in life, and the soil itself is actually is a very complex living ecosystem which supports plant life.
Plant life in turn supports higher living organisms and provide us with our source of food, directly or indirectly.
Beyond food production, caring for the Earth means caring for our forests, which are the lungs of the planet, ensuring a supply of clean air.
Forests are also inextricably linked into the process of rain formation and the water cycle, and therefore play a key role in ensuring our supply of fresh water.
It means caring for our rivers, which are the veins of our planet, circulating the water which all life depends on.
All living things are interdependent on each other, including people.
In reality as the saying goes, “no man is an island”, humans by their very nature are communal and social animals, and just like the rest nature, of which they are a part of, are cooperative in nature.If you doubt the veracity of this statement, then cast your mind back past the psychologically delusional industrialised society in which we find ourselves in and look at history.
Traditionally, the punishment for serious wrongdoers in ancient societies was banishment or exile, being forced out of the community to fend for oneself.
This was equivalent to a death sentence, or at least a cruel, lonely and unsafe life of severe hardship.
Beyond just physical interdependency, humans psychologically need community, modern studies have shown that having community is beneficial to the mental health of an individual, and lack of community is clearly detrimental.
The ancients knew that humans needed community, hence the nature of the punishment.
Pity modern society forgets this today and individuals banish themselves to an isolated and meaningless technological prison they call modern life, where they selfishly pursue their needs and never get to know their own neighbours.Self-sufficiency is a myth, and a harmful one too!“Care of People” is about promoting self-reliance and responsibility towards the greater community.
As I mentioned before, “no man is an island”, one person cannot do everything, and it is ridiculous to expect any one person to do so in any lifestyle other than the most primitive.
As Bill Mollison once stated, “I might grow food, but I don’t want to have to make my own shoes, I can trade food I’ve grown with someone who makes shoes…”.
That’s the essence of community!
It is about taking responsibility for more than one’s own future, and looking to help one’s community by sharing knowledge and experience, to skill people up so that they can provide for some of their basic needs.
It is about a collaborative effort to bring change to one’s own life and that of others.When people collaborate to support each other, and to meet their needs, both physical and non-physical, this creates a bond which builds a stable, supportive, and emotionally healthy community which prospers.“Care of People” importantly has to begin with the person closest to us, our self!
Beyond our individual selves, “Care for People” then extends to the next closest circle of people in our lives, our families, then our neighbours, our local community and then the greater community, and ultimately, all of humanity.
This is also described as the ethical principle of “Return of surplus to Earth and people”.No matter how you look at it, the world’s resources are definitely finite, so logically it follows that there is a finite and measurable share of resources available to each person on the planet to support them.If all the resources produced were a metaphorical “pie”, and each person has their “slice of the pie”, what happens when someone wants more than their fair share, when someone wants more than one “slice of the pie”?
Simply put, someone else goes without.Our Western society is driven by the unsustainable economic ideology of Consumer Capitalism, which incessantly chants the mantra of “continuous growth”, which in effect, implies continuously increasing consumption.
If anyone for even the briefest moment stops to think of how you could possibly have continuous growth, and for that matter, continuously increasing consumption, on a planet of fixed size with finite (and diminishing) resources, then the nonsensical nature of this concept is clearly evident.All our basic needs are met by the Earth herself, and our next higher needs are met through community with each other.What we fail to see through the delusional haze of non-stop shopping, wide screen televisions and a myriad of electronic consumer gadgets is that Nature keeps us alive for free, as she has since we first walked the Earth!
All our basic needs are met by the Earth herself, and our next higher needs are met through community with each other.
It’s only in this 200-year-old experiment we call “industrialised society” that we have become disconnected from nature, and forgotten how to tend to our own needs through the resources provided to us freely by Nature.
Yes, admittedly, a life sustained directly by Nature is much simpler and more fuss-free, which is probably why many people are opting to leave the cities, leave the rat-race far behind them, and move out into the country to lead a more balanced and harmonious life…The reason I make the point about Nature supporting us is that when we live closer to Nature, we realise without doubt that Nature does provides us with what we need, as long as we respect it and only take what we need to survive.
In traditional societies, hunters knew about sustainable harvests, they took what game they needed to feed their tribes, if they took all the game in a single season, firstly, they wouldn’t be able to use all the food, it would be clearly wasteful, and secondly, they would starve to death fairly soon afterwards.To put our current world situation into perspective, imagine a village with an orchard of fruit trees, the yields are plentiful, the villagers can harvest fruit as they feel hungry, they take what they can eat, and they return day after day to harvest fruit for the whole season.
Nature provides their needs, all for free.Now consider this situation – imagine one greedy villager arrives early in the season, picks all the fruit, and does not let anyone else have any.
He cannot possibly eat all the fruit himself, and it would naturally spoil in a very short period of time.
He tells the other villagers that they can have fruit if they give him articles of personal property in exchange.
He accumulates all manner of personal possessions, more than he needs, and the villagers get the fruit.Now, both situations are identical as far as resources go, the only difference being in the distribution of the resources.
The first example is collaborative, everyone receives their fair share for free, in the second example, where one individual is driven by greed and selfish self-interest, this resembles the consumer capitalist model of our modern world.
I hope this illustrates the value of the system of “fair share” and also puts into perspective what is so wrong with our society currently.If we overcome the incredibly irrational human preoccupation of amassing possessions, which is typified by the empty and life-devoid philosophy of “the one with the most toys at the end wins…”, and the frenzied resource-grab than ensues, we can take some responsibility for how much resources we consume in our lifetimes.
This ‘exploitation mentality’ is not normal, we are brought up with it, it is learned, and can be unlearned.Furthermore, when we share our surplus produce, when we share our skills, knowledge and experience, these actions build bonds between people which all works to foster a sense of stable, collaborative community.So, what’s the point of “Fair Share”?
The ethics of Permaculture, Care of the Earth, Care of People and Sharing of Surplus, promote a system which is life-affirming, and creates a sense of reverence for all life on the planet.By embodying and living these principles, we ensure the continued survival of our species, the health of the planet and maintain a healthy respect for life itself.Now, if anybody doubts the impact of a lack of a sound ethical principles, all they need to do is have a look at the world we live in.
In a world driven by financial incentive, where ethical conduct takes a back seat, the consequences are both expected and inevitable.
World consumption statistics clearly show the state of inequality in the distribution of resources worldwide, the excessive waste of resources by developed countries, and the unsustainable rates of resource and energy consumption.The Permaculture ethics compel us to take personal responsibility for our actions.
I will be passing this on to anyone who wants to learn about it and hope to radically change at least half of our garden to it’s full potential (due to complicated circumstances I only have half the garden to play with, but luckily it’s fairly big).
Thank you!LikeLiked by 1 person“Our Western society is driven by the unsustainable economic ideology of Consumer Capitalism, which incessantly chants the mantra of “continuous growth”, which in effect, implies continuously increasing consumption.” When sin expresses itself like the way the author described and in the form of GREED is good culture, humanity is crippled, and all other forms of life suffer tremendously.
People expect the earth to serve their own selfish and unsustainable interests, and they will reap what they sow … <edited> “Permaculture” is really about urging each of us to return to the original design and purpose for life God meant it to be from the very beginning when He created all things … <edited>.Humanity is heading toward mass destruction through their false hopes, wrong philosophies and poorly understood and carried out ethics… <edited><please note – unrelated subject matter been edited out to keep it on topic> LikeLikeOur ethical systems may arise from many different world views and perspectives, religious or secular.
All positive, life-affirming views, philosophies, religions and spiritual systems that respect living things and have a reverence for Nature fit in well with Permaculture.LikeLikeJust awesome, one of the best articles I have read all year, this needs to be in public schools, above mantles in homes an so on, it reflectsand mirrors my beliefs and values perfectly.
I have been gardening for 25 years now and have always been an organic gardener and over the last few years I have been searching/reading material about permaculture and also aqua phonic gardening – I find myself reading your information each night and being inspired to now include some fruit/berries into my veggie gardens.
I will start by transplanting a couple of dwarf varieties and see how I go.Thank youLikeLikeThank you for creating your website.
Have been on an increasingly environmentally friendly journey since – moreso since attending some Beyond Gardens events + avidly reading Jackie French’s books whilst trying to decide + progress on less lawn and more dedicated fruit + vege garden layout.
It all takes me back to Tom + Kit’s garden through the small gate in my back fence – it was a secret wonderland with so much growing and somehow Tom would always catch me snacking on a snowpea :o)  So this is fabulous and wished to encourage you to keep on keeping on.ThanksSimone (Perth)LikeLikeBrilliant post.
If you offer a pile of fruit to a group of apes, you will see that some dominant animals will hoard more fruit than they need… just as humans do.
Humans come by their behavior very naturally, because they are, after all, animals like any other.
So, those people have to be acknowledged, accounted for, and compensated for… without making them feel as though they were ‘born bad.’In compensating for these variations in human nature, we run the risk of falling back on authoritarian solutions; rules, laws, regulations.
This can lead to a reduction in essential freedoms in society in general, and wind up restricting or even harming those who were never its targets in the first place.If you can think of a workable solution to this, you will be a genius, indeed.LikeLikeYou might be surprised that recent research in primate ethology by primatologist Frans de Waal seems to conclude that monkeys have a dislike of inequality, the act of equally sharing of food strengthens the cohesion of their groups and their behaviour isn’t driven by greed, but quite the opposite!
)Humans can act from their lower nature and be controlled by their base impulses and desires, or they can let their higher faculties guide their conduct.
This is fine for the Permaculture community, we all agree on the value of people, the planet, community and cooperation, so we can agree on the three ethical principles discussed here.Unfortunately, most of the modern western world doesn’t know what it values anymore, or even agrees if anything actually has any real value!
That should explain some of the mess the western world finds itself in right now.
The result is a purposeless, meaningless nihilistic wasteland which we find ourselves in today, and that void in the lives of modern westerners is something that cannot be filled with the empty materialistic offerings they have available to them.
For example, trying to pass off intelligent design in a science classroom.LikeLikeAlso, I just wanted to say that I really enjoy this blog and I am going to share this article with some of my friends.
Those institutions often try impose ridiculous and frivolous restrictions on people in the name good for everyone.
There are common ethical values worldwide by humans, no matter under what government or religion they have to be universal, such as the importance of family.LikeLikeThanks for your comments Laura.
Traditionally religion served many purposes, some very pragmatic and practical such as providing society with a common set of values and a code of conduct so people worked towards the same goals and conducted themselves in ways that benefited the greater good of the collective.
This is something completely distinct and different to the aspect of religions concerned with cosmogenesis (creation and evolution of the universe) and theology (the study of the nature of God and religious belief).By defining the boundaries of human conduct, above which resided the highest of human virtues and below, the behaviours which were deemed unacceptable (and often punishable), expectations were clearly set as a means of regulating the destructive extremes of human individual behaviour and encouraging positive constructive behaviour for the purpose of social cohesion and harmony.
Religions have survived the test of time because they worked in this respect, as have ancient eastern philosophies such as Confucianism (which is not a religion) whose influence has spread right through Asia and is an integral part of Asian culture to this day.In the modern world this function of social cohesion is now the responsibility of the government, which only defines the lowest common denominator of behaviour, that is enforced through its monopoly on coercion.
Cross the line and you will be deprived of your possessions or your freedom, possibly your life.
The government does not legally define an upper boundary of human conduct above which is desirable, virtuous or commendable, as it’s not the concern of secular governments.The interesting thing about human nature is that it can be driven by the highest and noblest ideals or the lowest and most debased desires, and actions arising from either or anything in the continuum between the two can and has been justified using reasons religious or secular, as history has shown.The Permaculture ethics do not dwell on our differences in belief, but focus our common values as human beings.Do we value ourselves (and by extension our partners, children, families, relatives, friends, community, other people)?Do we value the planet that keeps us all alive and is essentially our shared, collective life support system?Do we have a sense of fairness about what we take and use, and regard for others in terms of what that we share or leave for them (present and future generations)?These are the questions the Permaculture ethical principles ask us, and if we can answer “YES” to all three then we do have a belief system that is at its very core and essence life-affirming.
If we conduct ourselves by these ethical principles, then our actions are also life-affirming and will make a difference in the present and for generations of humans to come.LikeLikeStumbled upon your website after watching your video with Geoff.
We must stop being materialistic consumers and start becoming producers again.There is no us and them there is only WE!I will greatly enjoy reading and sharing your website you are a blessing to humanity.Peace and blessings….LikeLikeA good ethics could use a hymn (or a few hymns) to reinforce important points.
It speaks to the ethical point “Care for the Earth.” I quote some lines from the second verse of the “hymn” as a fair-use sample:“You can plant two strong young trees for every one you’ve takenYou can make and keep a pledge for every one you’ve brokenOr let your indifference make you blind, let your greed guide your handYou can care just for yourself, or you can care for the land”The full lyrics can be read on Eric’s website: http://ericbogle.net/lyrics/lyricspdf/carefortheland.pdfIt can be heard on YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7jTdQ2mgLhILikeLikeI appreciate the inclusion of ethics as central to permaculture.
it touched my heartLikeLikeWonderful explanation of Permaculture Ethics, Does social media and technology part of fair share.LikeLikeHi John, the ‘fair share’ principle is as much about sharing knowledge and experience as well as surplus harvest, and is an important part of community building.
Sharing your experience empowers people.
Technology and social media can be used for the purpose of empowering people, that’s what this whole web site and my Facebook page are all about!There are a few other ways we can share our knowledge, skills and experience:Volunteering on community projectsWriting articles for newsletters, magazinesRunning workshops and presentationsCreating Websites that provide free informationLikeLikeI live on ten acres and have grown food and flowers for twenty-five years.
The curious aspect of permaculture/no-dig gardening for me is that I have SO much land!
I am changing direction in part by establishing  “no dig”  beds on a site that overgrew with tall weeds every Summer which is right out my back door.
I appreciate learning about the natural value of soil structure and how much is disrupted and destroyed when we dig up and till the soil.LikeLikethanks for your blog, you are recommended reading for a free online university of Oregon short course on Permaculture.
the earth system is a self-sustaining system, it recycles woods into soils so things grow again (that’s a perpetual grow system, which you asked about: the earth system) the earth system is a perpetual system.
the thing that is finite is land for us, more might be created,  but we are rapidly destroying it and overpopulating it, and the system takes more time than what we have given it (‘it’ not ‘she’, that’s how you create stereotypes or the new normal, the earth doesn’t have a sex, if it did it would be a true hermaphrodite) to regenerate.
it’s the opposite to disposable.What is more, you spoke of normality for humans as being something they are not doing now: over consuming instead of the normal consuming less or just adequate: fair share.
you say, or imply, that there is firstly, such a thing as normal, and secondly you argue from that with a conclusion that humans in their non irrational ie sane state their life would be more full.
 Bruce Charles ‘Bill’ Mollison (1928-2016), the “Father of Permaculture,” has truly left the world a better place than he found it.
As co-founder of the system of Permaculture with David Holmgren , he created a holistic design system that emulates systems that exist in Nature to create sustainable human settlements and food production systems which integrate harmoniously with the natural environment.In 1978 Bill founded the Permaculture Institute, and developed a formalized system for training Permaculture practitioners.
His pioneering work had a broad and far-reaching global influence, directly impacted hundreds of thousands of lives, and indirectly affecting many millions more worldwide in a profound and positive way.In recognition of his work for his service to humanity, he was honoured with numerous awards, including the Right Livelihood Award in 1981 for his work in environmental design.
In 1988 Bill published the magnum opus of his written works, ‘The Permaculture Designers Manual’, which Permaculture practitioners universally refer to as the ‘The Bible of Permaculture’.In his later years he established the ‘Trust in Aid’ fund to assist Permaculture teachers to reach groups in poorer parts of the world, with the goal of training up local teachers to continue the work of teaching Permaculture.In a deeper sense, through his work and teachings.
Bill pioneered a deep respect for the planet and for a more sensible and sustainable way to live on it.
To people that met him, he was an academic, a storyteller, an outdoorsman, an adventurer, an irreverent lady’s man and a larrikin at heart.
He demonstrated great leadership, leading by example and inspiring others to altruistic goals of making the world a better place.
In my own personal experience, I was lucky to be one of Bill Mollison’s students, and spending two weeks in an intensive PDC course with Bill Mollison and Geoff Lawton was a truly life-changing experience, I got a lot more than I bargained for!
A deep personal change that led to a total career change and shift in life-focus was not something I planned.
It was a fortuitous event that led me to a far more meaningful and satisfying life.
Bill Mollison really was ‘bigger than life’ as a person, and that overwhelmed some people, some even claimed he had a huge ego!
Behind the irreverent public persona that loved to challenge people for the fun of it was a deep, caring, humble man that dedicated his life to caring for the Earth and its people.
As my teacher, his life has filled me with inspiration to make a real difference and live a life worth living.
A true visionary and pioneer, Bill Mollison dared to dream of changing the world for the better and had the courage to go out there and make it happen.
His lasting legacy is an ever-growing world-wide network of permaculture practitioners and teachers, continuing the ecological revolution that he started.
Bill Mollison, thank you for your priceless gift to the world.It is only appropriate to leave Bill to have the last word, as he always did!
"The impetus for the work I do is to leave our children gardens, not deserts."
 The Permaculture Design Principles are a set of universal design principles that can be applied to any location, climate and culture, and they allow us to design the most efficient and sustainable human habitation and and food production systems.Permaculture is a design system that encompasses a wide variety of disciplines, such as ecology, landscape design, environmental science and energy conservation, and the Permaculture design principles are drawn from these various disciplines.Each individual design principle itself embodies a complete conceptual framework based on sound scientific principles.
When we bring all these separate  principles together, we can create a design system that both looks at whole systems, the parts that these systems consist of, and how those parts interact with each other to create a complex, dynamic, living system.Each design principle serves as a tool that allows us to integrate all the separate parts of a design, referred to as elements, into a functional, synergistic, whole system, where the elements harmoniously interact and work together in the most efficient way possible.Now that we  know what the design principles are, and what their purpose is, let us explore each of the design principles in detail.
Firstly, to introduce all the design principles we employ in Permaculture, here is a summary list with brief descriptions of each one where necessary, to provide a general overview of the areas they cover.
The links below will direct you to the detailed articles on each of the design principles.
Thank you for the informative article too!LikeLikeThe design diagram was drawn with SmartDraw software.LikeLikeThanks for posting this.
I am trying to apply these principles in designing my homestead kitchen.
And I really enjoyed seeing your garden on Geoff Lawton’s video.
Do you have any other ideas or sources for info on permaculture kitchen design?LikeLikeThanks for your comments, I’m not aware of any sources of information on a permaculture kitchen design, but there’s lots here that you can apply to any type of design.A few ideas, you can use the system of zones, the appliances used most frequently and areas for tasks that are carried out most often need to be made the most accessible, the infrequent in less accessible places.
Use overhead hooks for hanging items such as utensils or braids of garlic.Look at the requirements of each type of storage – food pantries should not be located against external walls that get hot in summer, keep the food cooler naturally and extend its storage life.
Having strategically positioned recycle bins for recyclable waste such as plastic or paper products is important, as is having a convenient place to hold a container with lid to place kitchen scraps for your worm farm or compost bin.
Will you use a bokashi bin (or two) to recycle kitchen scraps that can’t go in the worm farm or compost bin?
Design a place to locate these when working out your kitchen bench design.
They need a shady well-ventilated area in the kitchen to dry (as direct sunlight makes them lose their aromatic oils), you can either make a rack to hang then or bench space to lay trays out.You can get very creative, co-founder of Permaculture David Holmgren has a demonstration property and home, his food pantry uses natural cooling by venting cool air from an underground vent through it, so its naturally a few degrees cooler and that allows him to store food items such as fruit and vegies that would normally go in the fridge, so he can use a smaller fridge and use less power.Hopefully this gives you some additional ideas, sounds like an exciting project!LikeLiked by 1 personThanks!
Hoping a lot more people follow your lead!
I live in a temperate climate zone in México called Atlixco, Puebla.
The first Permaculture Design principle is ‘Relative Location’.In this principle, every element (separate component in a design) is placed in relationship to another so that they assist each other.In Permaculture our primary concern is with the relationship between things, and how they interact, rather than with the things themselves.
So, in Permaculture design, we focus on the connection between things, and by understanding the nature of the elements, and how they benefit each other, we can determine the optimum location for them.All elements have inputs and outputs, and they can have many of these.
By the correct placement of elements, we can create a relationship where the outputs of one element feed into the inputs of another element in our design.To know what an element’s inputs and outputs are, we have to understand its nature, and when we have done this, we can determine the relative location where the element is best placed in our design.
Pictured above are several examples on the application of the Relative Location principle.In our designs, it is important to remember that ‘elements’ do not just include the things we add, but existing structures also.
These include trees and buildings, as well as the ‘real elements’ of nature such as sun, wind, rain, and various earth features such as soil type, slope/gradient, banks, gulleys, waterways, hills, mountains and so forth.
In summary, we can optimise our designs using the Relative Location principle by locating design element near other ones so that their inputs and outputs flow into one another, or where they interact with another element to bring about the desired effect.I do some of these suggestions already because I was a Science major in college and always liked messing around in the yard.
Your site is awesome.
Thank you for being here.kenLikeLikeThis site is fantastic!
ThanksLikeLikeYou and your garden are a fantastic example, just wat I need!
Thanks…Jeannette, Amsterdam, The Netherlands  😉LikeLikehow do actually we convert sun’s energy to potential energy?LikeLikeHere are two examples:1. pump water to an elevated level using a solar powered pump, the water can then be gravity fed down to use the stored energy or the water2.
store sunlight as electricity using photovoltaic (solar) cell and batteryLikeLikeAwesome site!
Thanks for sharing your knowledge with the world!
🙂LikeLikeAwesome site!
I’m inspired.LikeLikeYou have a excellent website!
: )LikeLikeIf purchasing a 400m square block in Melbourne what block is best for maximum sun in back gardenLikeLikeIdeally in the southern hemisphere you would want the back of the block facing north for maximum sunlight all year round.LikeLikeThanks so just to confirm the house and the driveway should be facing south on a normal square suburban block?LikeLikeYes, that’s correct!LikeLikeThanks I’ve only managed to afford a 400m2 north east facing block so I will have to try and make doLikeLikeFill in your details below or click an icon to log in:			You are commenting using your WordPress.com account.
The second Permaculture Design principle is ‘Each Element Performs Many Functions’.To maximise the efficiency of a design, every element (component) is selected and located with the intention that it serves as many functions as possible.We can only do this when we fully recognise all the properties of an element, and when this element is a plant or animal, we must have a thorough knowledge of this organism.
When looking at plants, we need to identify aspects such as: If we look at a Willow tree for example, the functional analysis would be as follows:Ecological/Environmental Uses – Willows have many beneficial environmental uses.
> Phytoremediation – Willows clean up toxins from contaminated sites.
> Wastewater management (biofiltration) – Willows filter contaminants from wastewater, and can be used in ecological wastewater treatment systems.
> Environmental protection and preservation – Willows are often used for land reclamation, streambank stabilisation (bioengineering), slope stabilisation, soil erosion control, shelterbelt and windbreak construction, soil building, and soil reclamation.
> Environmental reconstruction – Willows are used for constructing wetlands and wildlife habitat.
> Gardening – Willows are used for in the construction of hedges, “living fences” and other living garden structures and general landscaping         > Living snowfences – Strategically planted willows trap drifting snow.
> Farming – Willows can used by farmers as an animal forage to feed their stock.
Horticultural Uses – Willow bark contains natural plant growth hormones which can be used for rooting new cuttings.
Now, if we take the above functional analysis, we can design a practical application of the ‘Each Element Performs Many Functions’ principle .Here we have a steep slope on a creek bank adjoining a farm, with run-off and possible contaminants coning in off the farm.
The steep banks are vulnerable to erosion from the fast flowing run-off of rainwater uphill.Placing a willows allows us to stabilise the banks with the tree’s intricate root net and prevent soil erosion.
The roots enter into the water where they create a home and shelter for fish, increasing the fish population.
Any contaminants or nutrient run-off from the farm are captured by the willow, preventing them from entering and polluting the waterway.
The roots also filter the water in the waterway, clearing and cleaning it.
The dense canopy provides a natural evaporative cooling which creates a protective microclimate.
This creates a buffer from the harsh elements which supports the creation of a local wildlife habitat which can support a greater amount of flora and fauna than a bare bank.
The sheep on the farm are provided with a nice shady sheltered spot, and they also have a source of forage in the overhanging willow branches.
This is what it looks like in real life, when first built:Here’s the same system, fully grown:Once again, all of the elements serve multiple purposes.
The grapevine:The strawberries:It actually gets much complicated than that in my design.
Both these plants are good companion plants to grapevines, and this particular geranium is insect repellent and works a treat if you rub it all over exposed skin to prevent mosquito bites.
Just the thing for late evening simmer gardening!
When the grapevine is dormant and has lost all it’s leaves, the bare trellis can be used to support climbing peas, which therefore creates a system of succession planting also (which, incidentally, is another Permaculture design principle)!
So, in essence, in order to produce functional and effective designs, you must thoroughly understand:Designing Permaculture food production systems is all about designing with plants first and foremost, so if you don’t know your plants intimately, then I recommend you do so as soon as possible.
Permaculture garden design presupposes a high level of competency in horticultural skills, and the only way you’ll gain these is by working with plants over a period of time till you really understand plants.
To be frank, your designs will only be ever as good as your understanding of the plants you use and the range of plants know about.
Plants are living entities, not ‘design features’ like the landscaper’s pergolas, water features and paved paths.
Remember, you are designing with Life itself, and how can you even begin to design living ecosystems with Life itself if you don’t understand the nature of that Life.With an understanding, or even better, a real connection to Nature, the natural harmony and efficiency of Nature will be ultimately reflected in your designs!Simply awesome!
😉LikeLikeYou’re welcome!LikeLikeI was so inspired when I saw your garden in Geoff Lawtons video ‘Urban Permaculture’ and now I am really enjoying your blog.
Je consulte de nombreux sites sur la permaculture et vous êtes le premier site aussi précis, aussi pédagogique, aussi agréable, aussi fourni d’informations.
I’m starting many gardening experiment this year and I’m really interested in exploring what I can do.
Do you have any recommendations for resources on learning more about plants outside of hands on?LikeLikeGeneral gardening books and horticulture texts, it’s hard to be specific, I read a lot on gardening because I work part time as a professional horticulturist, it’s what I do for work.LikeLikeAwesome idea with your grape vines.
Last fall I moved in 4 4 x 6 raised garden beds in the orchard area of my backyard.
Now the grapes can grow up into the fruit trees and the trellis supports tree branches when they get heavy with fruit, the Jostaberry’s have a protective wire cage around them and  I have room to still plant/seed in about 5 large seasonal veggies all around.LikeLikeCan I grow raspberries and strawberries together?LikeLikeCheck my Companion Planting Table here – https://deepgreenpermaculture.com/companion-planting/companion-planting-table/You’ll see that neither is a good or a bad companion to the other, so it comes down to management of your garden bed, can you stop your raspberries invading and overrunning your strawberry patch?
Simply beautiful examples!LikeLikeThank you so much for putting specific plants in there, some of the information I have read is not specific like this.LikeLikeYou’re welcome!LikeLikeThanks for a lovely and informative site!
You mention an urgency to intimately know your plants along with a high competency in horticulture.
Are these things I can learn in books, higher education or certificates (there are many free sites online) or is it first-hand knowledge.
It’s a bit overwhelming.LikeLikeA lot can be gained from hands-on experience – grow the plants that you want to grow, and read about them to learn more about them, then put into practice what you’ve just learned.
After a few seasons of care, you’ll have great first-hand knowledge about growing the plants you love!
Ive got a fabulous native garden at Present ( thanks mum!)
I feel torn between what I feel our land needs and my  body that’s very much used to northern hemisphere vegetables, fruits etc… Do I have a food forest out the back and a native garden in the front for local flora and fauna?
Is that a good compromise?LikeLikeYou can plant Australian native and indigenous plants right through any garden as long as the plants aren’t phosphorus-sensitive.
Many Australian plants, to varying degrees, have the ability to take up phosphorus very efficiently from very poor soils, so if they’re put into very phosphorus rich soil they get poisoned from taking up too much.
I have quite a few planted in my food forest, and the rest in pots and containers.In my opinion, my ideal is food forest in the backyard and a native garden in the front as you mention.
The native garden will be in flower at times when exotic plants won’t be, and will provide a valuable source of nectar for bees and birds, as well as habitat for native fauna.LikeLikeFill in your details below or click an icon to log in:			You are commenting using your WordPress.com account.
The third Permaculture Design principle is ‘Each Important Function is Supported by Many Elements’.The key focus of this principle is to: Firstly, the whole point of identifying which functions are critical is so that they are adequately addressed in the design.While this may seem like common sense, if this point is missed, the consequences can be disastrous to say the least.
By formally addressing this step, we create a checklist of what we need to pay important attention to, so nothing is accidentally left out.One of the largest flaws in a design would be to not address critical elements on which the success of the design depends.
Secondly, the reason for ensuring that critical functions are supported in two or more ways is essentially that of resilience.A resilient design is one where the operation of critical functions continues if any one system were to break down.By building multiple systems to support one function, we eliminate any weak links in the design.
So, what functions are so important that we need to go to this trouble over in our designs?
This is the very substance that supports all life, without it, nothing lives.
This is a good place to start.In an urban Permaculture design, unless the property is ‘off the grid’ so to speak, we already have mains water supply.
This provides a source of drinking water for people and pets, water for washing and cleaning, and irrigation water for the garden.The garden also naturally receives rainfall, which, depending on rainfall levels, may be sufficient to sustain the garden without supplementary mains water irrigation.In this scenario, if the mains water supply was cut off, contaminated, or restricted, both people, animals and garden may be in trouble.
Even though the garden may possibly survive on just rainwater falling directly from the sky (if there is enough of it), as it has two water sources, the household has no other water source, other than mains water supply – the single point of failure.
We can make the system more resilient by harvesting rainwater from the roof and storing it in a water tank.
This captured rainwater can be used for washing, flushing the toilet, or even in the shower.
If the rainwater is run through a water filter, such as a reverse osmosis/activated carbon filter, it can provide the household with pure, clean drinking water for drinking and cooking.
Now the household has two sources of water, rather than just one.It doesn’t have to stop there, for we can still install a wastewater recycling system if we really want to go to the trouble to capture wastewater from the house and purify it to a level where it becomes potable water fir for human consumption.
If we do that, we end up with three water sources for the house alone.
The rainwater stored in the tank can also be pumped into the garden, providing the garden with a third source of water, the other two being mains water and direct rainfall.
Once again, we can take this a step further and install a greywater system that pumps dirty water from the kitchen and laundry to our shrubs and trees (you should never direct greywater into garden beds where vegetables are growing, as the water contains high levels of bacteria and will contaminate the food and make you sick!)
By doing this, we have now added a fourth water source for the garden.
I’ve illustrated a simplified version of this below: Here we can see that the brown drip-line irrigation feeds both the main garden beds, and the tree/shrub areas.We can select the water source that runs into the drip-line irrigation, we can either run mains water from the tap, or we can pump rainwater from the tank.The greywater from the kitchen and laundry can only be directed into the tree/shrub area, but this area is also fed water from the mains/rainwater drip-line system.
NOTE:  I’ve stated that this has been simplified to illustrate a point – please note that kitchen water is technically classed as blackwater, the same class as toilet water, as it contains very high levels of bacteria, because it contains food waste.
You would not direct kitchen water into your greywater system, it would in reality go into a separate waste treatment system that treats sewage.
This illustrates the range of sources (elements) that we can use to provide water (function) in an urban permaculture design.
In a larger scale rural design, we get many more options.In addition to the water sources already mentioned: We also have many other additional water sources such as: Here is an illustration of the above-mentioned water sources in a rural setting: Furthermore, we have ways of capturing more of the natural rainfall using the following methods: Natural rainfall can often flow across and over sloped ground rather than soak into it.
We can enhance the ground’s ability to soak up more water by using contour trenches,  which are called swales in Permaculture.
We can also use chisel ploughs to help the soil absorb more water.
The berm is usually planted up with ground cover plants, and nitrogen fixing plants.
When these plants are established, the fertility of the soil is improved, and then a row of trees (usually food producing) is planted there.
The water soaks past the tree roots as it moves down the slope through the depths of the soil.
The swales will also collect any soil that is being eroded from the slope, and slow the flow of water down to dramatically reduce soil erosion.
Chisel ploughs are used to break up compacted soil without turning it over and disrupting the soil structure.
By cutting narrow channels around 30cm deep in the soil, we improve drainage, aeration and water penetration in the soil.
This also keeps organic matter on top of the soil, where it can break down to form a useful mulch, and therefore prevent erosion of the soil.
Another important function that we need to pay attention to in our designs is Food.As the issue of food security becomes more prevalent in our world of energy decline, peak oil, and growing urban populations, we look to resilient food sources to address the matter.Once again, we are looking to create a system with built-in fail-safes, where we can continue to have a reliable source of food if one source fails.
The criteria for designing resilient food systems is that they must be able to: Several strategies can be employed for ensuring that food is produced all year round, these work by extending the harvest season.Firstly, with fruit, we can take advantage of the fact that different fruit trees bear fruit at different times of the year.By planting fruit trees that bear fruit in summer, autumn, winter and spring, we can have an abundant supply of fruit all year round.As a rough guide, here are the seasons when different temperate fruit mature and are ready for harvest:  Another way of extending the harvest season is to plant different varieties of the same fruit tree,  which all bear fruit in different months, to ensure a long productive run of a specific type of fruit.Therefore, instead of planting one variety of a specific fruit tree which will bear fruit for a short period of time, we can use early season, mid-season and late season maturing  varieties of the same fruit tree to extend the harvest season over many months.For example, to be able to harvest apples six months in the year (from mid-summer to early winter), we can plant:  We can also extend the harvest season of vegetables too, but this requires a very different approach.
Here are some ways to do this: Furthermore, by planting both Annuals and Perennials, you have greater resilience with your food supply.Annual plants require more work to grow, have a fast growth spurt, and require large amounts of nutrient in a short space of time.
They also yield seeds which can be used to sow more annuals in the following years, and they can be left to self-seed.Perennial plants have slower growth rates, and either persist through all seasons, or die down above the ground only, while the roots remain active and burst forward with new growth in spring.
These can seed, or can be propagated by division in many cases, yielding more plants which can then be used to extend the garden and its food producing capacity.By employing both annual and perennial plants, both of the plant growth and survival strategies are utilised in food production, maximising the garden’s resilience to adverse conditions and crop failures.In rural setting, food for livestock is also very important.
Here we need a combination of annual perennial forage crops as well as trees that can be fed to livestock.Fodder trees include varieties such as honey locusts, poplars, tagasaste and willows.
For human sustenance, a variety of foods are required to ensures that the range of nutrients that are required for maintaining health are obtained.The common varieties of foods are leaf and root vegetables, fruits, berries, nuts and grains.At the risk of stating the obvious, the wider the variety of foods grown, the more resilient the food supply.
For example, as a source of magnesium, we can use: Similarly, when it comes to sources of calcium, we have a choice of: Not that we choose our foods by the nutrients we want to derive from them, but in the case of this example, if you grow many of these foods, your body  won’t run the risk of magnesium or calcium deficiencies.
Even if some of the plants fail to yield any produce in any one season, as you’ll draw the required nutrients from all the other sources available to you.
By having more than one of this design element, if you lose one, you still continue on, just with one less.For example, if you’re  growing apricots because you depend on dried apricots as a fruit source over winter when there’s not much around, you’ll be in trouble if something happens to that one apricot tree you so dearly depend on.
Not only do you now have four times the produce – real abundance, but if by some chance you lose one tree, you only lose 25% of your apricot production, rather than all of it.But depending on one single variety has its own inherent risk, as some pests or diseases may attack one variety of a plant or tree and not another, so to build even more resilience in our food supply, we can take a further step, which leads us to our next strategy.
This strategy is very important when growing key staple foods that you depend on, such as wheat, rice, corn and so on.
Many communities in the past have learned to use different varieties of their staple food source plants to ensure that they don’t face starvation should one variety fall prey to pests or disease.For example, corn or maize has been cultivated in Mexico for 5000 years, it was first domesticated in Mexico’s Sierra Madre region around 3,000 B.C.
It is one of the three most important staple food crops in the world.
The other two are rice and wheat.In Mexico, farmers have bred and preserved thousands of different traditional varieties of corn.
Each variety is specific to location, micro-climate and soil type within that country.
As such, Mexico is the world’s most important centre of biodiversity for corn, with 20,000 corn varieties and plant relatives, including the progenitor species of corn, called teosinte.
With this much biodiversity, we have very high levels of resilience to factors that can endanger production of a staple food that a large portion of the world depends upon.By growing many varieties of corn, if one variety succumbs to pests or disease, the resistant varieties survive.
If this diversity is lost, it would place future food security at risk.
If a pest or disease were to strike, it may then affect all varieties, which would lead to massive global food shortages.
Basically, world food security depends on the availability of this biodiversity.
We can apply this strategy with more than just staple foods.
We can use it with any plants that come in different varieties, be it fruit trees or vegetables.
when pests or diseases strike (sometimes due to irregular seasonal weather) or simply when we wish to enjoy different flavours of natures bounty.For example, different varieties of plants and trees can deal with sudden seasonal weather changes better than others.A recent weather fluctuation here turned our dry temperate summer into a humid tropical one for a few weeks, totally destroying all early season stone fruit.
Any varieties of stone fruit that produce late in the season escaped the calamity as the weather returned back to normal by the time their fruit was starting to grow.Another seasonal fluctuation resulted in a very short.
The short summer did not allow the large tomatoes to mature, so the harvest was greatly reduced, but luckily the cherry tomatoes flowered and fruited earlier than the main type I grow, and continued to produce when the other variety stopped.It is quite clear that by using different varieties of plants and trees, we can ensure a continuation of the harvest, even when suffering losses of some of our produce.
The key is biodiversity, that’s how nature ensures its survival and continued growth, and that’s the best mechanism for us to use, since our approach in Permaculture is to model nature’s ‘best practices’ in our designs!
Throughout human history, we have survived off seasonal produce, but using our ingenuity we have devised means of extending the use of the surplus harvest so it can sustain us through the less productive and less abundant seasons, such as through the cold winters.We have learned to smooth out the lean times through preserving food – through a wide variety of techniques.
Storage of grains and legumes, drying of fruit, using fruit and berries in jams and preserves, pickling of vegetables, fermentation of vegetables, and making alcoholic beverages from the fermentation of fruit juices, grains and even vegetables.With this in mind, some varieties of produce lend themselves better to preserving than others.
Certain stone fruit varieties make for better preserves than others, so if you’re selecting peaches to bottle, select the varieties with the correct texture that are recommended for this purpose.
So, where possible, if you wish to employ food preservation, plan at the outset to include varieties that are best suited to whichever preserving method you wish to employ.
The third important function that we need to pay attention to in our designs is Energy.The input of energy is required in any system to create change, to move things from one state to another, to perform work.
By employing a variety of energy sources, we once again have a back-up, a fail-safe, we eliminate any single point of failure, so our systems continue to run if any one of our energy sources were to be cut off.
Energy can be derived from: Where possible, the logical preference is for renewable sources of energy, as they can be replenished on-site without having a dependency on outside sources.
The preference is to use renewable sources of energy in our designs because they are a sustainable energy source, and they allow us to create little to no pollution of the environment in the process, which is important in Permaculture systems.Here is a brief overview of some of the renewable energy sources available to us that we can include in our designs: Solar power in the home is provided through solar photovoltaic cells (solar panels) to generate electricity, or from solar thermal (solar hot water) systems to provide hot water.Solar energy is a renewable source of energy that is inexhaustible and non-polluting, unlike fossil fuels which can and will run out, which are polluting and produce greenhouse gases when burnt.In areas that have regular sunny weather, solar power is a viable source of alternative energy.
By connecting a bank of rechargeable batteries, the energy can be stored, and is available at any time.
By having batteries to store solar power, households can go ‘off the grid’ – that is, generate all their own power and run without any connection to the mains power supply.Solar power systems can be quite expensive to set up initially, and the initial outlay of money can be discouraging to many people, but the long term benefits of solar can be significant, and they pay for themselves after many years.
Solar water heaters use either a flat plate with collector panels (dark painted metal plate with fins, similar to a car radiator, that provides a lot of surface area to heat up in the sun, and warm the water) or evacuated tubes (similar to a thermos, the vacuum means there is no air to carry the heat away, while the sunlight shines through the glass to bring heat in, and heat up the water).
the result in either case is that the warmth of the sunlight raises the temperature of the water.Solar hot water heaters can be used in conjunction with gas hot water heaters, where they can pre-warm the water in colder months, and completely heat the water without using any gas in the warmer months.Solar water heaters can reduce our dependency on fossil fuels, and save a lot of money on water heating.
One third of all greenhouse gases produced by households come from water heating, so there is a significant environmental benefit too.In Melbourne, Australia, where the climate is classed as Cold/Temperate, a solar hot water system can supply free hot water for around two thirds of the year.
In warmer climates, hot water is available for even longer periods.
Solar power can also be used for solar pumping water to an elevated tank.
This coverts the solar energy to what is termed in physics as ‘potential energy’.The potential energy here is the energy stored in the water due to its position in respect to gravity.Since the water at an elevated height has the potential to perform ‘work’,  it can be used for gravity-fed irrigation without pump, or it can be run through a mini-hydro system to generate electricity.One important fact to keep in mind is that no energy generating system is 100% efficient, so whenever you convert energy from one form to another, you lose energy in the process.
An electric motor converts electrical energy into mechanical energy, and is roughly 90% efficient (some energy is lost to mechanical friction and electrical losses).
A mini-hydro is a pump working in reverse, you push water through it to generate electricity.
You lose energy each time you convert from one form to another.
Going from a pump to a mini-hydro, both which are around 90% efficient means you only end up with 0.9 x 0.9 = 0.81, or 81% of the energy you started with.
So remember, the fewer steps in energy conversion from one form to another, the more efficiency, and the least energy is lost.
The energy inherent in the movement of air can be used to spin a wind turbine, which drives a simple electrical generator, to generate electricity.Since wind is a natural atmospheric phenomenon, wind power is a clean energy source of renewable energy.
One wind turbine can be sufficient to generate enough electrical energy for a household.Wind is only a viable source of energy in areas that have fairly  constant windy conditions, and since the wind does not blow constantly in the same way the sun shines during the day.
wind is not a consistent energy source, so it is often used to supplement other energy systems rather than function as a  complete stand-alone system.
Micro hydro systems convert the flow of water into electricity.Flowing water from a small  stream is used to rotate turbine blades which drive an electrical generator, to generate electricity .
The power output of a micro-hydro systems depends on the amount of water flowing, as well as the size of the turbine itself.Micro-hydro systems are efficient energy sources, as it only takes a small flow of water to generate electricity.
They are also very consistent and reliable source of energy as a stream flows constantly, all day and night.
As such, micro hydro systems are ideal for remote areas with continuously flowing water.Micro-hydro is quite inexpensive, and affordable for a small home.There are a few limitations to be aware of with micro-hydro systems.
Most obviously is the requirement for a stream or other source of flowing water.
Since output is dependent on water flow, seasonally fluctuations in water flow will affect the how much electricity the system generates.
By performing a thorough evaluation of the stream where a micro-hydro system will be set up, the best site can be chosen so as to avoid any adverse effect on the environment.
Geothermal energy generation involves drilling deep into the ground to gain access to the heat that arises deep within the planet to either generate electricity or as a source of direct heating.This is a rather specialised energy system that is limited to specific areas, and is not easily set up by an individual.
These systems  release greenhouse gases from deep within the earth (though less than fossil fuel burning power generation plants), and the dissolved gases and hot water from geothermal sources may carry trace amounts of toxic chemicals such as mercury and arsenic.
There is also the  possibility that groundwater contamination with geothermal systems.
Furthermore, there is the issue of local depletion, which necessitates the drilling of more bores when the power output begins to fall off in the long term.Since the process of drawing heat from deep within the earth is rather intrusive, can lead to local depletion (and is therefore not truly renewable), is not truly clean and is not a system that can be set up readily, it is only included here for the sake of completeness, and does not represent an energy source that is of equal viability to the previously mentioned systems such as solar, wind and hydro.Keeping things in perspective, while there are still many other systems that have been proposed to generate power, such as tidal systems that use the rise and fall of the ocean tides to generate power, these, like geothermal,  are in a class that I term ‘inaccessible’, it’s not like you’ll be setting up a geothermal system or a tidal power generator in any of your permaculture site designs for a while yet… The fourth important function that we need to pay attention to in our designs is Fire Protection.Wildfires are fire that burn uncontrollably in a natural settings (wilderness or rural areas), consuming combustible vegetative fuels, such as forests or grasslands.They are also referred to as bushfires, forest fires, grass fires, depending on the location where the fire occurs.Fire protection as a function is particularly relevant to rural properties, especially in Australia, the driest continent in the world, which is plagued by periodic bushfires.Because of the widespread destruction caused by fire, the name of the game here is risk minimization.
With the other important functions discussed earlier (water, food and energy) the aim is to preserve and maintain the continuity of these functions.
Let us now look at the various approaches to the function of Fire Protection that need to be incorporated into a design.
It is important to keep in mind though that wind and updraughts created by the heat of the fire can carry burning materials for considerable distances and easily over a very wide firebreak.The area surrounding the house is usually cleared to a distance of 30-50m (100-150’) of any loose fuels or flammable materials to create a firebreak.The area past the cleared space around the house can be planted with a barrier of fire resistant trees and plants, to create a shelter belt, as discussed below.
A shelter belt is a wide strip of deciduous fire resistant trees and plants that can shield the house from radiant heat, and catch wind blown burning embers.Trees suitable for this purpose are typically European deciduous trees, such as deciduous fruit and shade trees.A selection of suitable trees includes: I have included an extensive list of fire retardant and resistant plants and trees for reference purposes below.
Below is a table which summarizes the properties of plants that are fire resistant and those that are not: Fire Resistant PlantsThe following types of plants are less likely to catch alight and burn in a bushfire:Plants which are more likely to burn include:Source : ACS Distance Education – Webphotos Free Articles, Designing a Fire Break  This is an extensive list of plants and trees that can be used in the design of a shelter belt:Fire Retardant FloraThere are many varieties of trees, shrubs and ground covers which resist intense burning and/or have less chance of contributing to ember attacks.
These plants have a number of distinguishable features, including a high salt and moisture content and a low volatile oil content in the leaves.Usually fire retardant trees have thick, well-defined bark and few branches which grow low to the ground.
These trees and shrubs rarely shed large quantities of leaves and twigs and their seeds are usually enclosed in woody capsules.It should be noted that under the right circumstances, such as a fire’s intensity, that even fire retardant plants can and will burn.
It is the degree of resistance and their ability to reduce airborne embers that make fire retardant plants attractive.
Used in conjunction with other landscaping techniques (e.g.
The location of buildings is the fist step in common sense fire-protection design.
By understanding which locations are most vulnerable to fires, we can avoid these areas and site buildings in locations that afford the greatest degree of fire protection.The mistake commonly made by people not knowing any better is to site locate a building in the worst possible place, and then try to implement fire protection measures, or design away the problem.
This simply can’t be done.A common example of this occurs In Australia, people sometimes have the misguided idea they want to build a house ‘surrounded by native forest’ often with only one path in… Since 75% of our forests here are Eucalyptus forests, that’s what they most likely surround themselves with.
No amount of designing will correct such a grave error.
This is happens for two reasons:  As a consequence, the worst places to site a house is on sharp rigdetops or hilltops.
To reduce the risk of fire, houses need to be sited:   Fires continue to burn as long as fuel to burn is present, so it is important to remove: To prevent any burning embers blown by the wind from starting a fire near the house, or setting the house itself on fire, it is important to clear the space 30m (100’) wide or more right around the house.This means removing any loose flammable material such as dry sticks and branches, dry grasses, firewood piles and so on.
Anything organic with a low moisture content, if it is not overly large, will burn.Trees and plants do not have to be removed from this area, as long as they are not a fire hazard.
Deciduous trees, including deciduous fruit trees, sappy and moisture rich plants, and ground cover plants that are green in summer all help to reduce the danger or radiated heat, the dense growth creates a shield to catch burning ember, and they burn very slowly or not very well and reduce the intensity of the fire.Trees that are high in resins and volatile oils, such as eucalypts and pine trees, are a major fire hazard and should be cleared from around the house perimeter.
Tall grasses and plants, which dry in summer and create an ideal tinder which can start a fire, can be controlled by: Dry braches and twigs need to also be removes, these serve as kindling if a fire gets started, can be: Fallen leaves are also another fire hazard when dry, wit these: To prevent fires reaching into the crowns of the trees (a crown fire is unstoppable!)
Hoses are used to extinguish any spot fires or dampen down areas.These are suppled by water systems that have built in redundancy in terms of power and supply.
Since mains power may be often cut off in a fire, water can be gravity fed, or pumped via an independent solar charged battery driven system.
The water can be supplied via gravity from a rooftop/elevated tank or pumped via tanks or a high capacity dam.It is important that these systems are designed to resist heat/fire and function for as long as possible in the event of a fire.A detailed discussion of these water systems is beyond the scope of this short section, the point is that this aspect of fire safety needs to be incorporated into the design, and a lot of though needs to be put into how it will operate, and how it will continue to run in the event that one system should fail.
From building location and earthworks, to tree and plant selection, through to water supply systems, each part plays a role in building a complete fire protection system.
As an overall summary, we have now seen how each important function in a design, Water, Food, Energy and Fire Protection, is supported by many elements to create a fault tolerant, resilient system which ensures the continuing functionality of our system, even in the most adverse circumstances.Utilising this third design principle, we can design resilient systems that minimise the chance of a disaster brought about by the failure of any one of the critical functions.After all, in Permaculture we model our systems of those of nature, and Nature only builds resilient systems!What an amazing site!
I will be checking back here oftenLikeLikeThank you for putting up this website, it’s very inspiring.
The fact that it’s the people producing them who suffer the pollution of their region, and not the richer people planting them on their big houses does not change the overal impact.
I’m currently working on my forest garden following Martin Crawfords bible 🙂LikeLikeReading this material for the first time brought the ”AHA” moment for me since I started reading about permaculture 4 years agoLikeLikeFill in your details below or click an icon to log in:			You are commenting using your WordPress.com account.
The fourth Permaculture Design principle is principle of ‘Zones and Sectors’.The design principle of Zones and Sectors is concerned with efficient energy planning, that is, planning the placement of elements in the design, such as trees and plants, animals, structures and buildings, to make to most efficient use of energy.Efficient energy planning can be broken down to the following three categories:A.
SlopeWe will examine each in turn to see how we can use these concepts to maximise energy efficiency in our Permaculture designs.
Zone planning is a system where the location of an element in a design is determined by: This is a basic logical principle, whereby the things you use most often, and the things you have to pay the most attention to, are placed closest to the house in the design.Consequently, the things that are used the least often, or that require little or no attention, are placed furthest away in the design, and things that fall somewhere in between are placed accordingly.By situating the most often used or serviced elements in a design closest to the home, it makes it easier to access them.
This means less energy is expended to access them, making for a more energy efficient design.As a practical example, a kitchen garden containing the most often used vegetables and herbs would ideally be located in close proximity to the kitchen itself, so when the need for herbs and vegetables arises, it’s only a quick step outside the back door of the house to get the required cooking ingredients.
It would be highly inefficient, and extremely wasteful of energy if you had to walk across your whole property, to some remote back corner, to get what you need to prepare a meal, for the following reasons.
Firstly, you’d be less likely to go there, and secondly, you would have difficulty maintaining a kitchen garden that is harder to access – as you can’t keep an eye on it, and are less inclined to maintain it if it takes a whole lot of effort and energy to do so simply because it is so far out of the way!
Zones are abstract conceptual boundaries around the home which help us to work with distance to plan efficient energy use.The areas around a house are divided up into zones numbered 0 to 5, based their accessibility and frequency of use in relation to the location of the house.
The lowest number denotes the most frequently accessed areas, while the highest number indicates the areas least accessed.Here is a conceptual zone diagram, illustrating the various zones around the house.
NOTE: Zones are often misunderstood in Permaculture design.
Let me stress the following points before we get into further details:By defining the different zones around the home, we can then create some guidelines of what we can put in each zone in our designs.So, let’s see what goes into each zone!
This is the home itself, the centre of activity.Unless you are creating a Permaculture design for a bare block of land, and have to decide where to locate the house, and the design house itself, then Zone 0 is not normally a concern for most designers.Where there is a pre-existing house on the land, that normally will be your Zone 0 and the beginning of your zone mapping.
If you do have to locate and/or design the house (!)
, It goes without saying that the home design should be energy efficient, and provides an environment where the occupants can live and work in a sustainable and harmonious way.
This is the most intensively used zone, and the most managed and controlled.Zone 1 is the area nearest to the house, and also includes the most frequently accessed areas , such as alongside often used paths.Keep in mind that this zone is defined by access, so if there is an area near the house that you don’t visit, or is hard to get to, even if it sits next to the house itself, then it is not included in Zone 1.If you leave your property daily to go go work for example, then the path from the street to your house and the immediate areas alongside it will be included in Zone 1, as you visit these areas twice daily.The diagram below shows how the area around the house, coloured green, is Zone 1, as is the path from the street.
Elements that are located in this zone include all the things that you need to access most often, or that need the most frequent attention, such as:Zone 1 plantings usually employ complete mulching, using a system such as sheet mulching, and are fully irrigated with irrigation systems such as drip systems, which sit below the mulch on the garden beds.Remember, Zone 1 is an intensive system, it is a human ecology, that does not exist in Nature, and would fall apart without human attention.Note: This zone is also used quite intensively , but a bit less than Zone 1, and accommodates some of the larger and slightly less frequently used elements, that still need fairly frequent attention.Elements that are located in this zone include all the things that you need reasonably often, or that need the fairly frequent attention, such as:Zone 2 plantings can employ complete mulching using a system such as sheet mulching, but if the area is too large and this is impractical.
then spot mulching around the trees may be employed, and tree guards can be used to protect trees while they get established.
The zone is basically farmland, where the main crops are grown (for personal use and to sell), where orchards of larger trees are located, and where livestock is kept and grazed.
Once these areas are established, they only require minimal maintenance and care.Elements that are located in this zone include all the things that require infrequent attention only, such as:Zone 3 plantings employ green mulching, which is an under-planting of ground cover plants which serve as a ‘living mulch’ for the trees.
These plantings are unpruned, and not all plants have irrigation to water them.
This zone is a part wild/part managed, and its main use is for collecting wild foods, timber production, as a source of animal forage, and pasture for grazing animals.The trees in this zone are managed by allowing animals to browse to control new growth, or by thinning (removing) seedlings to select the variety of trees that will be allowed to grow.
This zone is an unmanaged wild natural ecosystem, such as bushland, forest or similar natural area, free of human intervention, interference or control.Zone 5 is a wilderness conservation area, and space that provides us with the opportunity to step down from our role of controlling Nature, to one where we can just witness Nature in its pure form, where we can simply observe the cycles of Nature and learn from what we see.
It the place where we can meditate and reconnect with Nature, and come to understand our place in the world.The wilderness area does not have to be restricted to the outer perimeters of a property in a design.
Zone 5 can extend as a wedge all the way from the outer perimeter right up to the house, to create a wildlife corridor as part of a design that brings natural ecosystem close the the home.In urban areas, Zone 5 can be a nearby creek, or a neglected area of unused vacant land.
Now that we have discussed some of the guidelines of what we place in each zone, it is appropriate to now revisit our zone diagram, but with a more practical focus.The reason zones are rarely circular is because ground is rarely flat, and even apparently flat ground will have a measurable gradient.
Furthermore, areas of land can be irregularly shaped, so real world zone diagrams can appear very different from our previous conceptual zone diagram.Here is an example of a zone diagram which is closer to a real-life example, where each zone is shown in a different colour for illustrative purposes.
Here, we can see that the zones can be irregularly shaped, they can overlap rather than form concentric circles and a particular zone can appear more than once.This should illustrate the flexibility we have in mapping zones in zone diagrams, and how far from the circular conceptual diagram real-life examples can be.
One question that often arises for designers is “how big should the zones be”?The size of a zone is driven by two factors:With these factors in mind, here are some practical design guidelines for the ideal amount of area allocated to each zone.
m (1/4 acre) in size for a family of four, this size is manageable as an intensive food production system.
m (1 acre) in size for a family.Zone 3 – can range from 4 to 20 acres for a family.Zone 4 – can be any sizeZone 5 – is a wilderness and is used for hunting and gathering In conclusion, zones are concerned with the flow and use of energy inside our system, optimising it by the use of distance, and the strategic placement of elements, according to their frequency of use and the attention they require.Zone planning though, does not account for all the systems of energy interacting with the site we are designing.
A site does not exist in isolation, it exists as part of a larger environment, where external energies, the elements of nature, which come from outside our system, also act on it.To plan for these energy systems, we use a system of energy planning known as Sector Planning, which is discussed in the next section.
Sector planning is concerned with energies external to our site, the elements and forces of Nature, that come from outside our system, and pass through it.These energies include: Since these wild energies come into our system from outside, we can strategically place elements in our design to manage or take advantage of these incoming energies.By placing plants, trees or structures in the appropriate areas, we can: Let us now examine each of these three approaches.
Where external incoming energy is detrimental to our system, we can block its flow, preventing disruption to our system.Wind is an element which often requires steps to manage it in most designs.
Hot summer winds, cold winter winds, salty seaside breezes, and damaging dusty winds all need to be restricted in a design through the use of windbreaks.
Windbreaks can be constructed using specifically resilient plants and trees, or by building protective structures.Identifying where the summer sun and winter sun shines is important for managing the harsh midday and afternoon summer sun (north and west sun in southern hemisphere, south and west sun in northern hemisphere).
Deciduous trees can be planted around the house to block the sun in summer, keeping the house cool.
In winter, when the leaves fall, the low winter sun can warm the house naturally.
Man-made structures can also be built around the house which take advantage of the sun’s low winter angle and high summer angle to provide summer shade and winter sun.Where fire dangers exist, the areas most prone to incoming fire are identified, and firebreaks are placed in this area in our designs.
We place elements here that do not burn such as roads, cleared areas, stony ground, concreted areas, stone walls, ponds, marshes and waterways.
Trees suitable for this purpose are typically European deciduous trees, such as deciduous fruit and shade trees.
A selection of suitable trees includes deciduous fruit trees in general, oaks, elms, willows, poplars, aspens, cottonwoods, figs, carob, mulberries and mirror bush.
I have included a wide list of fire resistant trees and plants in the article Permaculture Design Principle 3.
Each Important Function is Supported by Many Elements.Another application of ‘blocking incoming energy’ is the screening of unwanted views.
Trees, plants and structures can be erected to provide additional privacy, and block out unwanted views, while providing a more aesthetically pleasing alternative.
Free energy coming into our site from outside can also be utilised for our benefit.Water flowing into our site, either from directly above as rain, from run-off coming from adjacent properties, or collecting in an area (such as a flood prone area) can he redirected into lakes, dams, ponds, irrigation channels, swales and other water management systems.Wetter areas can be used specifically to grow very ‘thirsty’ plants and trees, which will help manage the excess water, or they can be converted to wetlands or bodies of water, such as ponds, lakes and dams for water storage.Water can be captured at an elevated point on the site, and being elevated, it is a store of what they call ‘potential energy’ in physics.
The water can then flow under gravity to perform work, such as irrigation or water supply.Water flowing across a stream or river can be used to drive a hydroelectric generator to provide electricity, or can have some of the flow diverted for irrigation purposes.Wind can be captured to drive wind turbines or windmills, providing a source of free energy to the site which we can utilise for our purposes.Sunlight can be harnessed in the generation of solar power, solar water heating, drying foodstuffs and so forth.
An area of a site can be opened up or cleared to allow a natural energy to come into the system more easily.Sunlight is one of the elements of nature that we might want to increase in our design.
If we have structures or trees blocking the light reaching our Zone 1 kitchen garden for example, rather than relocate the garden, we can clear the area to allow more light in.
Where places are too shaded, we can thin out trees or branches to increase productivity from our available space.Similarly, we can clear an area to create a view of a pleasant outside area.
If we have potentially stunning views of mountains, lakes, forests or simply an inspiring piece of Nature from the home, we will want to clear and objects obstructing the view to take advantage of such a positive feature in our site design.
To map out how these wild energies interact with our site, we can use a sector diagram.Each sector indicates one of the external energies discussed above, and is usually represented as a wedge shape, like a slice of a pie, radiating our from the centre of activity, Zone 0, the home, but it can be any other structure of central focus if necessary.The diagram below shows a sector diagram for the southern hemisphere, with the sun to the north.
Note that the Zone 5 wildlife corridor extends into Zone 1 in this example, to show demonstrate the flexibility of zone design.
So, in summary,we can use sector planning in our design to manage the incoming wild energies moving through our site.By the strategic placement of elements in our design, we can block, channel, or open up access to these natural energies.
to optimise the use of energy in our site.Together, zone planning and sector planning cover the management of energy inside the site and external energies flowing through the site respectively.
Once we have completed our zone and sector analysis, we can then consider one more factor in efficient energy planning, that is the concept of Slope.
The contour of the and has a considerable bearing on the design of the site, so this topic will be discussed on the following section.
When the site we are designing is on uneven ground, with, slopes, hills and valleys, further design considerations need to be taken into account because the contour of the land has a pronounced effect on the flow of energy in the system.With any slope, gravity will move things from the highest point to the lowest, and we can take advantage of the work performed by gravitational force to make our system more energy efficient.
The main emphasis of designing with slope is efficient energy flow.
Water naturally flows from the highest point to the lower, so slope can be used to move water downhill by gravity.
The movement of resources and materials from the high areas to the lower ones uses less energy than moving them across level ground, and considerable less energy than moving uphill.By locating access roads uphill of the house, less energy is expended delivering any materials to the site.Growing timber for firewood or plants for mulch uphill from the house makes it easier to bring the material back to where it will be used because the load is carried downhill.
Heat behaves in an opposite manner to water, as heat rises upwards, as does warm air.
Conversely, cold air, being more dense, sinks and flows downward.Dams and bodies of water situated downslope can reflect heat, as well as act as a thermal mass, heating up during the day, and releasing the heat at night.
Since heat rises, the heat emanated will rise upwards and warm the upslope area.Similarly, we can place plantings of tall trees on a slope to retain heat, to warm the incoming cold night air that flows down the slope.
If we place a house in this thermal belt, it will be warmed naturally.The keypoint referred to in the diagram below is the flat area or plateau that lies between the convex slope above it and the concave slope below it.
We can also take advantage of the fact that hot air or water rises to set up the collection point downhill and use the energy above the collection point.
If we set up a solar water heater downhill, the hot water will naturally rise upwards by convection, and the hot water can be accesses from an elevated tank.
This is the principle by which thermosiphons work.A solar hot water heater is basically a thermosiphon, a passive heat exchanger that works by convection to circulate water without a pump.
The water starts to move when the water inside the collector is heated by the sun.
It expands, becomes less dense, and therefore lighter, and rises to float above the cooler, denser, heavier cold water.As the convection moves the hot water upwards, out of the collector, cold water flows by gravity into the collector where it in turn is warmed up.
Forested steep slopes not only warm the cool night air to create a thermal belt as described previously, but they also help control soil erosion.
When water runs downhill, it will carve its own watercourses and gullies, washing away the soil in the process.
Trees, vegetation and ground covers absorb the flow of the water, and by creating a buffer between the flowing water and the soil, they control the problem of soil erosion.Water flows the fastest straight down a slope, and the effects of erosion will be most pronounced when water has the most direct path down a slope.
Additionally, when water flows fast down a slope, very little of it is absorbed into the soil.By digging trenches on the contours of the slope (contour trenches or swales), the flow of water can be slowed down, and diverted sideways on its downhill journey, to allow it to soak into the soil.
Each Important Function is Supported by Many Elements.Likewise, when constructing paths, tracks and fences, it is best to have then run along the contours of the site, and not downhill, as downhill running paths will create significant soil erosion, because there are no ground cover plants protecting the soil on a cleared path.
This is happens for two reasons:As a consequence, the worst places to site a house is on sharp rigdetops or hilltops.
During a fire, this powerful air movement can drive a fire cyclone, which will be burning directly over the house!To reduce the risk of fire, houses need to be sited: Fire control is discussed in further detail in the article on Permaculture Design Principle No.
the site is able to receive the maximum amount of sunlight possible, which means the house, trees and gardens can make the best use of available light, and there will be less issues with the damaging effects of frost.
When creating a site design, if we:then we will have a fairly sound and potentially successful design in terms of making the most efficient use of energy for our site.It is a fairly simple and straightforward exercise to systematically step through each of the areas covered under Zone, Sector and Slope, and attend to each part of the design as a separate task.
By breaking up even the largest site into smaller sections, it’s much easier to design.
Dividing up the site into zones does this for us, sector planning involves observation of Nature to see where the elements of nature come into our site design, and slope is a really a creative exercise where we see how much free energy you can grab from what nature offers!Happy designing!I am not sure where you are getting your info, but great topic.I needs to spend some time learning more or understanding more.Thanks for great info I was looking for thisinformation for my mission.LikeLikeThe primary concepts behind the design principles come from the Permaculture teachings of Bill Mollison, of course!
The expansion of these concepts and application of these design principles beyond what is taught in the PDC come from either my personal understanding of the design principles or my own experience.LikeLikeThank you for such clear, concise information!
very clear and easily understandable design methods.
It is taking away the sense of urgency to design everything all at once.
Now I can proceed with more awareness for the larger picture as I implement the first steps.LikeLikeOn our organic herb farm permaculture is an indispensable tool.
One is how a zone map can be such a fluid plan.
During the growing season, our beds are definitely zone 1.
However during the winter “off season” they are zone 2 at best.
Also, when doing a sector analysis it is important to recognize possible contamination sectors,  i.e.- sources of airborne or waterborne pollutants, and damage sectors, i.e.- sources of physical damage caused by neighbors, winds, water, etc.LikeLikeI live in a highly populated area: north of Belgium.
In fact I easily walk my plot of land up and down twice or more per day, where I pass almost all systems installed.
So my zoning is pinned to this; a balance between culture (human intervenance), and nature (nature’s intervenance) In this way the lower the number of zone, the more culture vs nature.
The higher the zone number the more nature has the leading role.
Therefore, the perfect balance culture/nature is found in zone 3.
my zoning: zone 0 (interior): almost no nature, 99% culture.
: nature that is present, is present by the goodwill of the human actor (me).
Insects or other animals that come in in winter are the only signs of wildlife.
Plants indoors are considered culture, not nature, because planted and kept alive by my presence.
zone 1 (exterior/interior aux buildings): human presence is far more dominant, but wildlife is excepted within the needs of the culture design.
Seedlings of trees are removed or replanted when in the way.
zone 2 (ext): zones that need regular maintenance: such as pathways, hedges, … weeding and pruning is done on regular but not intensive bases, and mostly in the form of harvesting.
Hedges are made so that they provide shelter for wildlife, still it’s the human design that prevails, within a strong observation of natures proposals.
Working with these proposals makes life easier and less energy consuming, hence the low maintenance.
zone 3: both nature as culture are equally present.
This is the case of an established food forest where the mechanisms of nature decide further evolution.
Most of edible vegetation here are perennials and/or plants that can easily take care of themselves and blend with natural habitat vegetation.
Also the use of animals in harmony with the regeneration of the ecosystem is well-balanced in this zone.
(Where in a zone 1and2 it could be slightly overcrowded eg chicken coop).
Chickens in this zone 3 are almost wild birds.
zone 4: nature prevails, but minimal human intervention is done, mostly to help nature to develop to its potential.
I never use machines in zones 4+, also I never work in these zones after having been at least 24h on the property, to be really connected.
Also we tend to speak in a lower voice in these zones.
All to respect the dominance of nature in this zone, and to become more nature ourselves and let go of all that culture.
zone 5: No-Go-zones.
At least 30% of the property remains zone5 at all times.
As permaculturists in dense area’s I see it as the principle task to preserve nature.
So 30% is a strict minimum in all my designs, if possible rather 50%.
Since zones are not determined by distance they don’t tend to be drawn archetypically as concentric circles.
There can easily be a zone 1 further away from the main house, and a zone 5 relatively closely.
I do mind the edge-effects between zones.
Even on a single patch there can be a degradation of zones.
A pathway zone 1, can have berry bushes on the side that need extensive maintenance (zone 2), and bordering to a trees patch can grow edible perennials (3), with behind that some coppice-trees(4), that border again to a dense no-go-forest(5).
Where borders between zones are short, I make strong borders (hedges of dead branches, are spikes, or other clear bordering.
I hope more people will pick up this criterion for zoning there projects.
thxLikeLikeThanks for your email, it’s great you’re giving the subject some thought!As an urban permaculture specialist I can assure you that zoning is not based on distance but energy efficiency!
Is it energy efficient to walk long distances, or carry materials up a steep slope that is close by and a short walk?
The zoning system still works whether you’re managing hundreds of acres or a tiny courtyard.The difference between zones is essentially management or human intervention – the inner zones are more managed, therefore they take more resources and energy to maintain, the outer ones progressively less so.
As a result, inner zones will  generally look more maintained, and outer zones more ‘wild’.What determines the location of the more managed inner zones is the amount of effort, energy and resources required to maintain them.
You would not locate an orchard that requires lots of mulching uphill from your source of mulch, and similarly you would not locate things that need constant attention in places which make it harder for whatever reason to get to them to give them the required attention, whatever the obstacle is, it doesn’t need to be distance.Hope this helps.LikeLikeI had similar information when planning out my garden except your “zones” are my “rooms”.
To not overload myself with garden work I “clean a room”.
When I’m done with that room I can move to the next room or just slow down a bit and play with the kitties in the garden.
I do have a low spot with water accumulation during heavy rain storms.
I haven’t done anything to this area except plant around it.LikeLikeThe concept is similar, the important difference being that ‘rooms’ in conventional garden design are aesthetically different areas whereas zones are functionally different areas, and that is consistent with the form (in conventional aesthetic gardening) vs function (in productive permaculture gardening).LikeLikeI would love to know from any experienced permaculcuralist what berries, culinary herbs and fruit trees works well together in tropical climates?LikeLikeHi Michelle, that’s a strange question to post in a Permaculture Zones and Sectors article and it’s like asking what edibles can you grow in a temperate climate, there would be thousands of plants and trees to list!
Do you have a source/link to further information on the area  of land required to feed an individual/family.LikeLikeThanks!
I can’t provide any further information other than the data I’ve gathered from my own food forest experiment – https://deepgreenpermaculture.com/my-garden/29-full-circle-four-years-in/LikeLikeReally good explanation of this.
I might only add that from experience, I have found that zone numbers may change during a year.
For example, while my main growing areas are zone 1 during the season, they become zone 3 during the winter when they have been put to bed and are dormant.
In fact, there is a Food Forest currently still producing food in Morocco that was established 2,000 years ago!
The concept of food forestry was almost lost to the annals of history when Robert Hart decided to adapt this design to his temperate climate in the UK in the 1960’s.
Bill Mollison, the co-founder of Permaculture, visited Robert’s site in 1990, and he quickly adopted this design element into his teachings and work.
The first 7 are identical to Robert Hart’s initial design.
The missing layers are the Aquatic or Wetland Layer and the Mycelial or Fungus Layer.Here are my Nine Layers of the Edible Forest Garden: 1.
Timber trees, large nut trees, and nitrogen-fixing trees are the typical trees in this category.
There are a number of larger fruiting trees that can be used here as well depending on the species, varieties, and rootstocks used.2.
In most Forest Gardens, or at least those with limited space, these plants often make up the acting Canopy layer.
The majority of fruit trees fall into this layer.3.
The majority of fruiting bushes fall into this layer.
Includes many nut, flowering, medicinal, and other beneficial plants as well.4.
A large variety of other beneficial plants fall into this layer.5.
Groundcover/Creeper LayerThere is some overlap with the Herbaceous layer and the Groundcover layer; however plants in this layer are often shade tolerant, grow much closer to the ground, grow densely to fill bare patches of soil, and often can tolerate some foot traffic.6.
There are an amazing variety of edible roots that most people have never heard of.
Many of these plants can be utilized in the Herbaceous Layer, the Vining/Climbing Layer, and the Groundcover/Creeper Layer.7.
Vertical/Climber LayerThese vining and climbing plants span multiple layers depending on how they are trained or what they climb all on their own.
Aquatic/Wetland LayerThis is my first new layer to the Forest Garden.
Some will say that a forest doesn’t grow in the water, so this layer is inappropriate for the Forest Garden.
There are a whole host of plants that thrive in wetlands or at the water’s edge.
There are many plants that grow only in water.
To ignore this large list of plants is to leave out many useful species that provide food, fiber, medicinals, animal feed, wildlife food and habitat, compost, biomass, and maybe most important, water filtration through bioremediation (or phytoremediation).
We are intentionally designing Forest Gardens which incorporate water features, and it is time we add the Aquatic/Wetland Layer to the lexicon.9.
Fungal networks live in healthy soils.
They will live on, and even within, the roots of plants in the Forest Garden.
This underground fungal network transports nutrients and moisture from one area of the forest to another depending on the needs of the plants.
In addition to the vital work this layer contributes to developing and maintaining the forest, it will even provide mushrooms from time to time that we can utilize for food and medicine.
I wrote a more detailed description and defense of this layer here.So this is my proposal to the Permaculture world.
Let’s consider all nine layers when designing our Forest Gardens.
Wetlands are vital in processing nutrient runoff and are very productive in their own right.
There are the differing “layers” along the light gradient from very bright on the surface of the water down to low light, very similar to the layers in a forest, for example.
Another example are the differences between stream, pond and swampland ecosystems, and the edge effects that occur between them.And as for the layer under the ground – I absolutely agree with you that it needs to be included – I would suggest though, that it be called something like “Under Soil Surface” or “Microorganism” layer, because the bacteria, archaea, worms, protozoa, and many other organisms, and their inter relationships, are all as important as the fungi/hyphae that are in the soil.Regards RichardWell done John, I completely agree.
There is so much that can be included in the aquatic/wetland layer I am surprised this was left out in the first place.As long as we are working outside the Plantae kingdom (which is fine by me), what do you think of adding bacterial to the Mycelial/Fungal layer classification?
Or maybe calling this the Sub-soil/Decomposer layer; as bacteria and fungi could also exist in water but not necessarily be a part of this layer.
These are just thoughts that pop into my mind as I try to consider this layer in a design system.
I can see where you might get some argument about wetlands belonging in this list, but I agree with you.
A great video altogether.http://permaculturenews.org/2013/06/07/mark-shepards-proven-technique-sheer-total-and-utter-neglect/Cheersr.I do agree that those two elements are overlooked by too many people, but on the whole I’m not an advocate of the layer concept.
Personally I don’t eat snails but technically they are a food product of this layer.
You could get all biblical and call them the ten commandments of permaculture “Thou shalt grow a canopy of tall trees” etc.Dan – While I understand your point, I rather disagree.
It is actually a vital part of design.
It is not just about the design element (its intrinsic nature), but how we choose to manage an element that determines where it belongs in the design.
It can be coppiced or pollarded or allowed to grow to its natural height with or without pruning.
This is similar to the grape you are talking about, but when we are talking about design, it is about how, where, and when we place that element in the system, and how it will be managed in the system, that determines its function.
We must have a structure or model in which to develop a mainframe design.
With a food forest, our structure is the concept of layers.
If we abandon that structure we will end up with errors in our design.
We will have trees planted too close togther.
We will have sun-loving trees sitting unproductive in deep shade.
We will have vining plants choking out or breaking branches of small trees and shrubs.
I have come across too many people (and I am not really talking about Dan now) who call themselves Permaculturists who want to abandon the science of design and just see how things “feel”.
This is a great way to create type 1 errors in our design.
This is a great way to minimize production on our land.
This is a part of the soil really, but it is not there yet.
We are not designing this layer – it occurs when we do everything else right.
There is almost no harvest (food, fuel, fiber, medicines, etc.)
Hence, not a layer in my designs.JohnWell, I am inline with the philosophy of Fukuoka.
I dislike that many people who consider themselves permaculturists still tend to think this way but it is deeply engrained in western culture.I would recommend reading the one straw revolution, which was written about thirty years before the word permaculture was even coined.
The central truth is that nature designs better systems than man.
Throw out a hundred seeds and trees will grow where and how they want, not where and how you think they should.
I have never planted a single fruit tree, yet I harvest a couple hundred kilos of fruit per year from my small block.
I don’t water or fertilise them, I just let them do their thing.
Doubtless there are other people who get higher yields per area than I, but in terms of effort vs reward I am way out in front.Reminds me of some things I was told about chess.
When I was young many people said to me “Its good to learn chess because it teaches you to think strategically”, but when I was a bit older I met a wise man who said “Its bad to learn chess because it locks you into one way of thought, linear, thinking in boxes”.Dan – I think there are two approaches to this.
The first is to be a forager… eat off the land.
If you are fortunate to be in an area that is abundant, than you can (as you do) harvest what nature provides.
The problem with that is that few people have this.
Yes, if we all would let nature heal itself, then we would end up with this eventually.
Also, while you may be able to harvest a lot of fruit, are you able to survive on this alone?
I come across people all the time who tell me that they could live off the wild, and they can, for a few days.
Would your area support your entire community without planting any additional fruit trees or nut trees or raising livestock or doing any management at all?This is where the second approach comes to play.
We purposely design systems to produce what we need, when we need it, and when we can use it.
This is working WITH nature, not against it.
We are being intentional about our design to meet ALL our needs, and a well-designed Forest Garden can meet almost all our needs.
We can have year-round food, fiber, fuel, medicines, shelter, and primary or value-added products we can sell on top of it to earn an income.A forager could also get all of this without ever planting a tree, as you have said.
Most people are not living in areas where they have access to enough land to truly support all their needs from the wild.
Most places in the world do not have a natural congregation of extremely useful plants.
And many of the ones that do were actually placed there, or encouraged (given advantage) by indigenous peoples.
It looks so “natural” that European settlers did not recognize them as such.In addition, one thing I do not understand.
Why is it that people always personify nature and separate humans from it?
We humans are part of nature.
We are part of the Earth and part of the natural world.
We are not separated from nature.
The bottom line is that I feel it is vital to work with nature, since we are part of nature itself, to design systems that regenerate and build resilient systems that optimize the products of the natural world, of which we can benefit, yet still allows nature to thrive.I totally agree with you on that.
So I went onto the Internet for a search and found your site.
Even more so when you know that production in water outproduces land 30 – 50 times!
In that sense it makes sense to include also a pond as part of a food forest as it does increase diversity and edges and increases functionality manifold : )[…] term “Food Forest”.
In order to have a totally maintenance-free food forest system, there are seven-to-nine layers of plants that needs to be planted on the plot.
Out of these layers, canopy trees are the layer that is more […]I like the addition of the two further layers, though I imagine the forest garden mycosphere as all pervasive rather than a layer.
I often think of a forest gardener as a gatherer as in hunter gatherer.
A metaphor for life, it follows the buddhist principle of simultaneous cause and effect.
I will go and read Robert Harts copy of One Straw now.Nice website btw!
The tenth Permaculture design principle is ‘Edge Effect’ – the use of edge and natural patterns for best effect.This design principle is concerned with increasing diversity and productivity in our systems by emulating the ecological phenomenon known as the “edge effect”, and the patterns found in Nature.To understand this design principle, first we will explore the edge effect as it relates to Permaculture design, and then look at how we can incorporate the patterns of Nature into our designs to make our systems more efficient and productive.
The edge effect is an ecological concept that describes how there is a greater diversity of life in the region where the edges two adjacent ecosystems overlap, such as land/water, or forest/grassland.
At the edge of two overlapping ecosystems, you can find species from both of these ecosystems, as well as unique species that aren’t found in either ecosystem but are specially adapted to the conditions of the transition zone between the two edges.
Edge environments occur naturally at many ecosystem boundaries, some examples of these are: The following diagram illustrates how the edge effect operates:In this example, each ecosystem, labelled A and B, contain only three species, coloured red, blue and yellow.Ecosystem A contains 3 species represented by squares and ecosystem B has 3 represented by circles.In the region where they overlap, called the ecotone, there are red, blue and yellow squares and circles.The combination of squares and circles (which represent six species) produce unique conditions which can now support three new species, represented as red, blue and yellow triangles.So, while ecosystems A and B each contains three species, the overlapping transition zone contains nine.This increase of diversity that results from ecosystems overlapping is known as the edge effect.The ‘edge effect’ – Where two ecosystems overlap, the overlapping area supports species from both, plus another species that is only found in the overlapping area.
Mangrove ecologies (land/sea interface) and reef ecologies (coral/ocean interface) are some the most highly productive natural systems.
Traditional human settlements are usually located at the highly productive transition zones between ecosystems, such as alongside rivers, estuaries or ocean, between foothills and plains, the outskirts of forest, or any combinations of these.In understanding edges, we need to keep in mind that they are the interfaces by which one ecosystem connects and interacts with another.
Ecosystems themselves do not function in isolation, they are all interconnected in a web of life, like all things in Nature.
By tracking the exchange and storage of such “common currencies” as nitrogen and organic carbon among biotic and abiotic system components and their throughflow across system boundaries, ecosystem ecologists demonstrated how ecosystems functioned as highly interconnected networks.”Source: Bart Johnson, Kristina Hill – “Ecology and Design, Frameworks for Learning”, Island Press, 2002  As we have seen, edges serve as the interfaces of ecosystems, and these borders are much more productive and rich in life.What this means in terms of Permaculture design is that: We can take advantage of the natural phenomenon of the ‘edge effect’ to increase the productivity and yields of the systems we design.
We bring this about by increasing the available edge in our designs.The way we increase edge is by looking to the patterns of Nature and emulating these patterns in our designs.Nature has evolved to be as efficient as possible over hundreds of millions of years, and we curiously find that in Nature’s designs there are no straight lines in Nature, but a variety of patterns which we see repeated throughout.So, let’s have a look at Nature’s patterns that allow us to arrange elements more efficiently!
When we look to Nature, we find similar patterns repeated through all forms of life.
In many natural systems, the surface areas that serve as interfaces to the surroundings are maximised by increasing edge through patterns.
A lobular (having small lobes) or crenellated (having square indentations) edge provides more edge than a straight line.Rivers run winding courses through the landscape, which increases the water penetration into the land and creates a greater area riparian ecosystem than if they were running in a straight line.
Aerial photo of the Mississippi-River Similarly, the macrocosm pattern are reflected in the microcosm, our own intestines wind the same way to maximise the length, and therefore surface area, to absorb nutrients from the food we digest.Human intestines show same wavy (crenellated) pattern We can still go further into the microcosm and find the same patterns.
In the animal cell, they are the main power generators, converting oxygen and nutrients into energy.
Mitochondria, the ‘power generators’ inside living cells, showing wavy pattern in their inner structure We can replicate this pattern in our designs to maximize the available edge.
If we are building a pond for example, without changing the size of the pond, we can double the length of the edge (the earth/water interface), and therefore squeeze in twice as much productive plants around it.
In the example below the mathematical calculations show how for a pond based on n 11.3m circle, we create 100 square metres for water surface, and by changing the edge from a straight one to a wavy, we can double the effective circumference.
We can use the same principle in garden bed design.
A wavy path through a garden gives us more edge to plant along, and more space to access the garden.
We can increase the accessible space and edges in a garden using ‘keyhole beds’.
A keyhole bed allows greater access into the garden beds without having to step into the soil, this preventing soil compaction, which hinders plant growth.
The same concept can be applied at the next level down from garden beds, to the actual planting layout within the beds, to optimise the use of space and therefore increase yields.The circles indicate the space allocated for each plant, so the plants remain the same distance apart in both cases.
If a circle is 15cm (6”) wide, then the plants in both arrangements are always this distance apart from each other.
When we change the planting arrangement from straight to ‘wavy’, we can increase the amount of plants in our garden bed in this example from 70 to 86.
The strips can be planted in ‘wavy’ lines to maximise the use of space and put more plants into a given area.Such a system is also more commonly referred to as Strip Intercropping, where multiple crops are grown in narrow, adjacent strips, that allow interaction between the different species, but also allow management with modern equipment.
Throughout time and around the world, intercrops have been used to better match crop demands to available sunlight, water, nutrients, and labour.
Spiral pattern in a flower  Spiral pattern in a nautilus shell When we utilise the pattern of a spiral in our designs, we use the pattern in three dimensions, our spiral pattern can rise into the air rather than just sit flat on the ground.The most common application of this design technique is a Herb Spiral, as pictured below.
The typical width of a herb spiral is approximately 1.6m (just over 5’) in diameter.Using this size, we can see that a simple circular bed has an area of 2.0 square metres, but if we create a mound of soil 0.5m high, our area that we now have available increases to 2.4m.
The higher the spiral (within reason), the more extra area we gain.The other advantage we gain with a herb spiral are the multiple microclimates that are created.The elevated design makes it possible to grow plants that dislike excessive soil moisture in areas that can become waterlogged.
Through a single structure, we are able to garden vertically to increase the available edge, create multiple microclimates, increase yields and productivity, and add visual interest to the garden space.
By increasing the edges in our designs, we extend the interfaces to the surrounding ecosystems, trap more energy and materials that move through our systems, and ultimately increase yields and productivity.Edge patterns can take various shapes – they can be wavy, lobular or crenellated, zigzag or spiral.
Different systems will require different approaches, and the factors that we need to take into account when selecting the edge pattern are landscape, scale, climate and plant species.Small scale systems can support greater pattern complexity, while for large scale systems, it is best to keep the patterns simple to minimise the work required to build and maintain them.Now that we can emulate Nature’s patterns to optimise the efficiency of our gardens, we can have gardens that are more  natural looking and aesthetically pleasing, and more productive too!
References:Bill Mollison & Reny Mia Slay “Introduction To Permaculture”Bart Johnson, Kristina Hill – “Ecology and Design, Frameworks for Learning”, Island Press, 2002 Banks-Leite, C. and Ewers, R. M. 2009.
eLS.Strip Intercropping (Pm1763) January 1999 – Iowa State University, University Extension “we curiously find that in Nature’s designs there are no straight lines in Nature”I’ve really enjoyed this series so far – but the line above is irritatingly incorrect and often repeated.
It doesn’t invalidate the rest of what you say, but Nature produces straight lines all of the time: have a look at the formation of many rocks and crystals which are often perfectly straight.Like I said, I’m enjoying what I read, it’s just that this is a pet peeve of mine.LikeLikeThanks for your comments, glad you’re enjoying this series of articles.“we curiously find that in Nature’s designs there are no straight lines in Nature” – I guess I should be more specific about that.
More specifically, living systems aren’t straight, nor are dynamic natural systems, because they serve a purpose or function, and need to be optimized for that function, and a straight line does not appear to optimal in living systems when we look at Nature’s preferences.
These crystals often occur naturally in clusters, which are of unusual and irregular shapes, even spherical, with crystal formations lining the inside of a sphere.
I agree with the principal for garden design though.
I’d actually read about your Melbourne garden before I started reading this and didn’t realise it was the same person.
The diversity and options available to me in this climate are endless!This site has changed my views on many of my long-established beliefs/traditions.
  505-455-051411a Camino Ancon, Santa Fe New Mexico (USA)Animals (domestic and wild) are a critical component of any wild or designed sustainable ecosystem, as without their participation and contribution ecological integrity is diminished or impossible.
Everything gardens in nature, and animals are in a leadership position.
Foraging is needed to cycle nutrients, clear fallen fruit, keep weeds down, spread seeds, and keep pests in balance.
By building timely and creative relationships between domestic/wild animals and food plants, much of the work of producing food can be accomplished through good permaculture design.Read more about our own demonstration site and work with backyard animals, and chickens.
Below are links to the past issues of the Permacuture Drylands Magazine – Sustainable Living in Drylands (1986-1996) on the subject of animals.
A permaculture project is a deployment of permaculture practices on an ongoing basis.International Permaculture Network in Africa, Mediterranean and the Middle East[1],[2]The Biofarming approach applied in Ethiopia has very similar features and can be considered permaculture.
[citation needed]The UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has produced a report on using permaculture in refugee situations after successful use in camps in Southern Africa and Republic of Macedonia.There are 60 schools designed using permaculture, with a national team working within the schools' curriculum development unit.
[citation needed]The development of permaculture co-founder David Holmgren's home plot at Melliodora, Central Victoria, has been well documented.Geoff Lawton's Zaytuna Farm next to The Channon in northern NSW, Australia, is a 66-acre medium-farm scale example of permaculture implementation.
Begun in 2001, the site is off-grid, and has multiple food forest systems, animal systems, kitchen garden and main crop areas, a large network of water-harvesting earthworks for passive hydration of the site, composting toilets, rocket stove powered showers, straw bale natural buildings, etc.
[3]City Farm Perth is an example of community permaculture in an inner suburb of Perth, Western Australia.
The farm was constructed on a brownfield site in 1994, and is a focal point for permaculture education, as well as community music and art.
[4]Permaculture Institute Asia [5] (PIA) lists most all major permaculture projects and sites in the Asia region.
Many of these sites show examples of Permaculture structures as food forests, integrated animal systems, kitchen gardens, bio intensive and other high yield food gardens, organic main crop areas, large networks of water-harvesting, earthworks designed for drought proofing and passive hydration of the land, many have composting toilets, rocket stoves, compost and/or solar hot water systems, and natural buildings made from local materials such as bamboo, adobe brick, rammed earth, wattle and daub, compressed earth block, super adobe, cord wood, straw bale, Earthship reclaimed materials, Hybrid structures many with Earthen floors, Green roofs and Natural Plasters and finishes.Living Ecology and Permaculture Patashala provide higher education to permaculture professionals through practical permaculture projects in small villages.
The drylands projects help poor rural farmers with sustainable agriculture and permaculture design implementation.
[6][7]Permaculture Institute Thailand (PIT) is (pined on Google maps) and is an institute representing Permaculture projects in Thailand.
PIT an Internationally accredited with certificates for courses and internships in - Permaculture, Natural building and Bamboo, Aquaculture, Food forestry, Vermiculture, Urban Permaculture, Sustainable living skills, Energy and alternative technology, Permaculture as Aid, Drought and Climate proofing your home and farm.
[8]The Phayao Permaculture Center, Phayao, Northern Thailand, is a permaculture project demonstrating permaculture design including education open to all interested in permaculture.
[citation needed]The Permaculture Research Institute Asia (PIA), located in Buri Ram Province, Thailand, is pined on Google maps, lists many of the Permaculture Projects in Asia.
It is a permaculture demonstration and education site.
Courses, internships and demonstration of permaculture design techniques, bio intensive gardening and farming methods and regenerative ecosystem designing.
Integrated aquaculture and ducks with rice paddy, they show how higher diversity leads to higher yields and food security which can be obtained from rice fields/paddy in the Mekong Bio region.
[5]WWOOF Thailand is a volunteer hosting organization in Thailand with many Permaculture projects hosting volunteers.
Host sites teach and practice Permaculture and agro-ecological and integrated farming techniques.
In Thailand traditional family farming methods are called "Natural Farming".
These methods often overlap with Permaculture methods, but with Permaculture adding recent technological and research findings and new methods of sustainable farming.
The Institute founded by Iskandar Waworuntu Alhajj an environmentalist veteran in 2006. International and national courses and residencies as well as natural building, aquaculture, food forestry, vermiculture, bamboo culture, coconut culture and many more courses and skills in self-sufficiency, regenerative design and leadership.A consortium of NGOs including Lom Orng[9] and Ockenden[10] is doing a post-flood livelihood and infrastructure regeneration project, in the country's northwest, which includes permaculture principles, and the establishment of a permaculture demonstration farm in Battambang Province which serves as a community farm and education site and includes a native tree nursery and biogas system providing clean cooking fuel and lighting.
[11]A Facebook Permaculture Cambodia page list various Permaculutre projects in the Cambodia region and the proprietors.The Himalayan Permaculture Centre (HPC) is a grass roots non-government organisation (NGO) set up by trained and motivated farmers from Surkhet district (Mid-Western Nepal) in 2010 to implement sustainable rural development programs in Nepal.
[12]The Al Baydha Project, a land restoration and rural community development program in Western Saudi Arabia.GROL Garden - Girne: An Urban Permaculture Project that accepts Volunteers who come under a work-exchange agreement.
GROL Garden provides food, accommodation, yoga classes, and hands-on learning in exchange for assistance on their Projects.
[17]There are a number of example permaculture projects in the UK, including:Other projects tend to be more community oriented, particularly in urban areas.
These include Naturewise, a north London based group that tends a number of forest gardens and allotments as well as running regular permaculture introductory and design courses;[28] and Organiclea, a workers cooperative that is involved in developing local food-growing and distribution initiatives around the Walthamstow area of east London.
[29] The Transition Towns movement initiated in Totnes and Kinsale by Rob Hopkins is underpinned by permaculture design principles in its attempts to visualise sustainable communities beyond peak oil.
[30]The UK Permaculture Association publishes an extensive directory of other projects and example sites throughout the country.The Permaculture Association of Teachers and Organizers on WiserEarth maintains a US listing.
[31]Maya Mountain Research Farm in San Pedro Columbia, Toledo, Belize, is a permaculture project founded in 1988 by Christopher Nesbitt on a 70-acre abandoned citrus and cattle land.
The land is up the Columbia Branch of Rio Grande from the Kekchi maya community.
Presently the farm manages over 500 species of plants.
The farm works on agroecology, permaculture, stacked polycultures and installs photovoltaic systems in schools in indigenous communities as well as protected areas.The farm works closely with farmers organizations and holds one Permaculture Design Course per year.Saint Michaels Sustainable Community started building their Permaculture Ranch in 2001 in the mountains of Esterillos, Costa Rica 3.5 Kilometers from the beach.
The building of the community was accomplished by interns, volunteers, woofers, ecological experts, a NASA scientist,agriculture students, permaculturists, local farmers, and environmentalists (some that formerly worked for oil companies)and a regenerative rancher, Justin Dolan.
Under Dolans' leadership five living roof homes have been designed and built using permaculture principals and two other homes have been built with rainwater harvesting roofs.
A natural salt water swimming pools was installed in a food forest containing over hundreds of types of fruits, medicinal herbs, a free energy aquaponics system, 12 rotational pastures, chickens, lambs, a herd of cattle, reforestation, an equestrian center, organic orchards, and a disc golf course.
The Candidates need to demonstrate expert knowledge and experience of satisfactory performing the duties involved from start to finish of each area of Permaculute Namely:Aquaponics design, feeding, harvesting of the fish, inputs and outputsHuglecultureBioCharSwales:  building design, plantingEdible LandscapingTerrace gardeningRotation of crops and gardensCover cropsKeyline designBasic Organic animal careRotational GrazingOrganic orchard managementIntroduction to medicinal plants and holistic animal careDriving cattleAgroforestery Food forestsEnergy  efficiencyCheck damsPlant propagationPlanting seedlings, transplanting seedlings, planting trees in square holes, Pruning closer together and pruned in for less water and higher yieldHarvestingBuilding garden bedsGildsZonesMaking compost tea; Higher recipe for fruit treesWeed identification, weedingRain water harvesting Composting methods Natural BuildingSoil regeneration and ecologyPatterns and edge plantingHolistic managementBio DynamicsSustainably intrigued with livingLiving roof design and constructionTwelve design principles of PermacultureZero Waste / Upcycling/ recycling - Producing no wasteAnd Disc golf[59]The Instituto Mesoamericano de Permacultura (IMAP)[60] was founded in 2000 by a group of Mayan farmers and professionals in San Lucas Toliman, Guatemala.
It is a not-for-profit community organization focused on the development of self-sufficient communities through the responsible management of natural resources, using permaculture techniques and ancestral and traditional knowledge.
Areas of focus include: the cultural and biological diversity of Mesoamerica; food security and food sovereignty; organic production systems at the community and familial level; and permaculture education and environmental stewardship.Since 1993, Cuba has transformed its food production using low-input, or organic agriculture and, to some degree, permaculture.
Havana produces up to 50% of its food requirements within the city limits, much of it organic and produced by people in their homes, gardens and in municipal spaces[61] The transformation in agriculture originated as a response to a crisis which is known as the Special Period.
Starting in 1993 Australian permaculturists traveled to Cuba to educate Cuban gardeners in permaculture practices.
[62][63]The movement of sustainable communities in Ecuador reflects a bit the fact that it sits on the halfway mark of the Earth: it is neither invisible nor well defined, though small, it has many projects, although they are not necessarily part of a functional network.
Garden Cottage July 1991In 1991, our family of 4 moved into the Garden Cottage, so named because it sits within the old walled garden of a large estate.
Our house was built as a retirement home for the gillie of the estate, in the late 1940’s, when the necessity for the kitchen garden had dwindled rather.
When we bought it, the property included an impressive ¼ acre of weeds, with a couple of apple trees chucked in for good measure.We enthusiastically began building our forest garden, including planting generous quantities of fruit trees and bushes, soft and hardwoods, ground-covering and edible plants.The building has also changed significantly since then, doubling in size and turning from a laird’s view of what constituted comfort for an artisan immediately post-war, to a family home, doubling in size and becoming much more energy efficient.Garden Cottage July 1996Here you can see some of our early experiments – as with any project you can expect successes and failures; although we like to think we’ve had more of the former!
A framework of ‘climax trees’ (fruit and nuts and some sacrificial timber crops for fuel) has been planted and is interspersed with understorey plants favouring food crops.Over the years we have, for instance, succeeded in growing several vegetable and fruit varieties ‘too far north’.
Quince, plums, cherries, apples, pears, apricots, pumpkins – all have flourished in our little patch of paradise, when other people said they couldn’t!
We have had great success with our nut trees – prolific hazels, but walnuts and chestnuts only just coming to fruition.
At the same latitude as Moscow and Alaska you can eat salad out of the garden pretty much the whole year round except when it snows.We grow our own firewood and timber for garden constructions.March 2007Annual crops this year include multiple varieties of: potatoes, carrots, turnips, parsnips, beetroot, radishes, broccoli, kale, Brussels sprouts, peas, broad (fava) and runner beans, garlic, fennel, artichokes (globe and Jerusalem) rocket lettuce and another dozen green salad plants, more herbs than you could consume in a lifetime, pumpkins, courgettes/marrows, We’re waiting to see whether our sunflowers succeed!We have over the years had many welcome visitors, either on teaching and training, or open days (we still run these in the summer, or for invited audiences, so email us if you would like to know when the next one is!
Currently our invited guests are some goldfish and a family of Call ducks, 1 male and 3 female, one of whom also successfully raised 5 ducklings this summer.We also happily house a huge variety of ‘uninvited’ guests – birds including most of the usual suspects you could spot in a garden, topped off with delights such as woodpeckers, treecreepers, goldfinches, nuthatches, flycatchers, and goldcrests.
We discourage pheasants, rats, pigeons and neighbourhood cats and dogs, purely because their effect on the ecosystem can be disastrous if left to roam free!Our garden, at times, has been a playground, campsite, concert hall, and fine dining establishment (of course with plenty of home-grown produce), ice-rink, pig’s palace, and bird sanctuary.
It has aided the local community centre in getting rid of 30 years’ worth of pigeon droppings (lovely mulch, thanks).
It has provided hundreds of alpine strawberry plants to the people of Berwickshire, as well as saplings, soft fruit bushes, seeds and fruit.It has now been twenty years since we planted our first foot on this green, green grass of home.
It now tells us the seasons by how much of the back wall you can see from the kitchen window –Summer 2009Every day it brings us new joy, new experiences, and new fruitfulness.Come and join us soon at one of our Open Days, and sample our little patch of Scottish heaven.
To find out more about the open days, email us using the details in the sidebar.To learn about permaculture and its sustainable design principles, pick up one of Graham’s books, published by Permanent Publications.It is standing proof of the success of a permaculture forest garden, and we hope to enjoy another 20 years in it.if (WIDGETBOX) WIDGETBOX.renderWidget('fbd26b9d-e8b8-4b3e-93a1-efd955b9d660');Get the Eco-Calculator widget and many other great free widgets at Widgetbox!
  We cultivate many species in our newly established agro-forestry system, a beginning productive tropical food forest.
Also Integrated Pest Management, Trees Outside Forests , and Agricultural Heritage Systems, Mapping Systems and Permaculture design and agroecology techniques.
In our Bio-dynamic organic garden we produce healthy organic food daily for our table.
Our consulting builds and fine-tunes small farms and agro-ecological systems that conserves natural resources, support the surrounding ecosystem in a regenerative symbiosis, providing valuable ecological services such as carbon sequestration, soil and water retention, and the creation of wildlife habitat.PIA also serves as a genetic seed bank for indigenous species and a buffer zone to the adjacent farms and ecosystems.
We are powering more by renewable energy, and our water is pumped from a pond using photo-voltaic panels.
We are also work with local communities installing village level photo-voltaic pumps.Also see our sister organization  Permaculture Institute Thailand , Permaculture Thailand along with affiliates (PRI Asia, Permaculture Institute Thailand, PRI Australia, Permies.com USA)  are committed to breaking through the barriers that have stood in the way.We invite you to come and explore this farm stay site to learn about the exciting new options to engage with this resilience building, sustainable movement.We host interns each January for one or two month internships for individuals, students, groups and volunteers.
We work with local NGO/CBO’s, provide training in Permaculture, renewable energy, sustainable development and host an annual Permaculture Design Course (usually in January of each year in Thialand, Onein May in USA and one in October in Canada) .
We are committed to promoting applied biological diversity as a means of ensuring food security, and replicating ecological services of primary forest in complex agro-forestry systems.
If you are a passionate and creative person, who is not afraid to discover what it takes to make a difference, help fix the mess greedy humanity has perpetrated on nature and planet Earth, then we invite you to join us.
“only when people live differently will society be different”.
In alignment with the UN Sustainable development Goals (SDG) and creating a “Ecological Civilization”  We will perish in the pursuit of money or prosper in the pursuit of a life that maintains a healthy balance between humans and the generative systems by which the Earth continuously renews itself.The fact is the world economy is remarkably unequal and also remarkably threatening to Earth itself.
Humanity depends on nature for food and water, materials for survival, and safety from environmental threats as natural catastrophe and epidemics.
For a species that depends on these environmental services we are not protecting the base of our own survival ….the planet and nature.
The world economy is causing a gigantic environmental crisis, one that threatens the lives and well-being of billions of people and all other species on the planet.
We provide solutions and alternatives thru practical hands on work and discussion of; circular economies, sustainable design, resilient alliances, regenerative agriculture,permaculture design, natural building, regenerative culture, holistic and systemic thinking.
For contact email our Head Instructor at permiesAsia@gmail.com    In memory of Bill Mollison 1928 – 2016 co-founder of Permaculture  email:  permiesAsia@gmail.comTelephone Thailand:  +66 086 3043898www.PermacultureInstituteAsia.com
Dreaming of a simpler life?
We have the trusted tools you need,  we teach sustainability skills, how to live, design and build resilient lifestyles and communities.
How to increase soil fertility, increase yields and lower costs and create food,  gardens, food security, we empower families, family farms and farming communities in Thailand.
We teach income empowerment by learning the skills of Permaculture design, soils, water harvesting, climate change mitigation, trees, crop regeneration, natural farming techniques forgotten long ago.
We do this so rural and urban communities and families can increase incomes, while regenerating nature’s ecosystems and environments.
We teach how to “work with nature rather than against her” using re-generative agriculture methods we build in multiple, multiple interconnected ecosystems services such that the whole area becomes regenerated and alive with life.Many people are searching for more meaningful and fulfilling life, while earning an income.
They want to learn how they can help the planet, we teach Permaculture design and/how to help create a better world while building ecosystems and soils.
At Permaculture Institute Thailand (PIT) and Permaculture Research Institute Asia (PRI Thailand)  we teach how to save money farming, by mitigating chemical industrial farming and using natures lessons of making soils, regenerating soils.
Using over ten different soils building techniques from science and recent information on soil life, we accelerate the soil creation process on farms, gardens and in cities.
By using the principals of Permaculture and working with natural processes, we recreate (regenerate) natural ecosystems and environments, and thus accelerate soil life and growth.
Our International Permaculture Design course based on Bill Mollison’s “Permaculture a Designers Manual” teaches solutions that allow us to easily grow our own food, catch and store clean water and energy, drought  proof our farms and gardens, build low cost beautiful natural buildings, reestablish trees and forests similar to here (video Loses plateau) but on a smaller scale.
We plan for climate change, heal the soil, land, nature, planet while empowering communities, neighborhoods and families.
We show how to grow chemical free nutrient dense food,  supply edible gardens to schools, build a quality of life for all people, while also helping the planet.Permaculture is a solution for our time.
A solution for all people, plants, animals and for human civilization.
“Permaculture is an ethical design science, using innovative science using agro-ecological techniques and  ecosystem intensification to deliver greater sustainability and higher value global food chains” – H.C. Story.
Permaculture takes an ethical view that applies natures lessons, to designing ways of living that are highly sustainable.
It teaches how to “work with nature rather than against her”.
Food security, community resilience, local economy, natural buildings, ecosystems regeneration and biodiversity are all included in Permaculture “designed living”.The Permaculture Institute Thailand  (PIT) and Permaculture Institute Asia (PIA) are Permaculture education and demonstration organization.
We encourage, support and facilitate all forums of education, demonstration sites, that offer resources, groups, courses and people associated with and practicing Permaculture in Asia and Thailand.
We are primarily an education Institution in Thailand with courses in Thailand, Laos, Asia and even America.
We host and teach both local and international youth including local young farmers in Permaculture.
Our methods employ ecological intensification, sustainable living, growing high quality foods and building resilient natural buildings and communities.Our certificates are “Internationally recognized world wide” for meeting International standard Permaculture education.
We also offer internships and apprenticeships (terms 3 to 12 months) on Permaculture farms and projects in Asia.
We have access to over 135 farms and projects in Asia thru our sister organization WWOOF Thailand and Permaculture Institute Asia.
LIFE IN Syntropy    Video 15mBillions in ChangeWe support and teach sustainable living thru research in ecological agriculture, bio ecology (read non-GMO) crops and non-chemical intensive farming, we work to conserve natural agricultural biodiversity and a fair and equitable food system.
We ask “what does it matter to be a great rice exporter, if the farmers are still poor?” and look for niches of increased yield and demand to support rural small family farms.https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yq5zxzuCg0U&index=3&list=UUBTOqyg9i7vwpVE82akwoJQOUR MISSION:Permaculture in Thailand applies to both rural poor and rich urban areas equally.
Our mission is to spread Permaculture, it’s Ethics, Principals and techniques thru out Thailand and Asia to all people.
Using the ideas, research and appropriate technologies of Permaculture to focus on making more sustainable livelihoods and where possible address issues of poverty, through family empowerment, community mobilization around sustainable, income-generation activities, combining, cultural, craft, ecological and food security dimensions of rural life which holds tremendous potential for both income generation and enhancement for the basic quality of life using Permaculture techniques.
Creating closed loop systems, teaching sustainable living practices, regenerating ecosystems as part of our Permaculture practices.
Students get the rare opportunity to work hands on with local farms and farmers thru our sister organization WWOOF Thailand (www.wwoofthailand.com) by staying at no/low cost on Traditional Rice farms thru out Thailand.
We provide real help to Thailand and the world by providing education and cultural exchange of people, youth and new ideas.
We bring rural communities, farms and people together with youth  of the world in hands on projects that build a better world.John Champagne      Permaculture Course Manual      Geoff Lawton, PRI AustraliaGREEN BANGKOKOur graduates move into waiting jobs upon completion of their 6 or 12 month internships.
The PDC course serves as foundation for further permaculture work and study and is a prerequisite for the Diploma in Permaculture Design, offered through The Permaculture Institute Asia.
Credit for this course is now accepted by a growing number of universities around the world.
To date, thousands of permaculture designers worldwide have been certified through this course, and now comprise a global network of educators, ecological activists who influence major corporations, individuals creating new business alternatives and groups of committed people working together to change the way we view and design into our landscapes.What we Do –  We specialize in healing the land and re-building “regenerating” ecosystems, our courses empower and educate others to do the same.
We conduct research, creating healthy food and market incentives and raising public awareness.
PIT can affect large-scale change in the Wet/Dry tropics of farms by designing Rice Paddy and Aquaculture integration into Asia’s rice paddy system.
The result is year round income to farms.
Implementation and application of the Chinampa system with swales to provide “droubt proof” moist productive soil resulting in year round growing environments.
We have set a goal of establishing 4 permaculture Hubs across Thailand.
These would be strategically-placed, locally led and managed hubs around bio-regional areas of Thailand– the goal is to empower people to use properly managed, rice paddy’s, aquaculture and livestock to heal the land.
Our group is composed of the leading practitioners of Holistic design and planning.
We strive to insure that all our decisions are socially, economically, and ecologically regenerative and sustainable, we wish to help build the next generation of healthy natural holistic food farmers in Thailand and teach visitors around the world ecologically intensive farming.Robin Francais -Djangbung Gardens, Nimbin, Au              Paul Wheaton,Permies.com,Missoula,Mo,USVOLUNTEERS WWOOF Thailand www.wwoofthailand.comTen Things Travel TeachesFor more on Permaculture in Asia see  www.PermacultureInstituteAsia.com  PermiesThai@gmail.comFacebook:  https://www.facebook.com/groups/279504195551964/(function(d, s, id) {  var js, fjs = d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0];  if (d.getElementById(id)) return;  js = d.createElement(s); js.id = id;  js.src = "//connect.facebook.net/en_US/sdk.js#xfbml=1&version=v2.0";  fjs.parentNode.insertBefore(js, fjs);}(document, 'script', 'facebook-jssdk'));For more information please contact:      PermiesThai@gmail.comWe are a team of dedicate Permaculturists, Natural Farmers and Eco-Agriculturists who wish to make a difference in sustainable farming, families and communities in Thailand.1.
If you use the Permaculture Institute of Thailand website (the "Website") you agree to be bound by these terms and conditions.2.
Access to the Website and content3.
The Himalayan Permaculture Centre (HPC) is a grass roots non-government organisation (NGO) set up by trained and motivated farmers from Surkhet district (Mid-Western Nepal) in 2010 to implement sustainable rural development programs in Nepal.In Nepal, over 90% of the working population are dependent on agriculture for their livelihood.
Subsistence agricultural practices have developed to be finely in tune with local climate, landscape and people&aposs needs.
Such practices are intimately interwoven with the forest and other natural resources to provide basic needs of food, fuel, fodder, timber, medicines, etc.
The result is a disempowered people with unequal access to basic needs, struggling to make ends meet despite working all hours and yet not even able to grow enough food to last the year.
These communities can be seen as "marginal" – lacking access to key resources such as education, health care, food security and credit.
These are the people and places where HPC has prioritised its work, where small inputs of appropriate technology and appropriate education can make huge differences.HPC&aposs strategy centres around 3 main activities:1.
DEMONSTRATION: (seeing is believing) of how local resources can be assembled, with additions from non-local sources as appropriate, to form a sustainable agriculture and resilient domestic food and energy security.
"Sustainable agriculture" here can be defined as "successful management of resources for agriculture to satisfy changing human needs while maintaining or enhancing the quality of the environment and conserving natural resources" (ILEIA).2.
TRAINING & EDUCATION (learning how) - to farmers and development workers in the process of design and implementation of demonstrated sustainable agriculture systems and approaches.3.
needed for farmers and development workers to design and implement such systems on their own land and in their communities.A fourth activity is RESEARCH to identify useful new species and cropping patterns, or combinations of those existing traditionally, which are favoured and can be appropriated by local farmers for their own use.
HPC carries out demonstration, training, resource production and research on its own resource centres (working farms) in Kathmandu, Surkhet and Humla districts.
It also carries out these activities on farmers own land, though the research needs to be risk-free otherwise they may lose valuable food crops/land if experiments don&apost work !See Sunrise Farm on FacebookHPCSee recent article on SRI and related developmentsYou are viewing the text version of this site.To view the full version please install the Adobe Flash Player and ensure your web browser has JavaScript enabled.Need help?
We are a nonprofit urban gardening project focused on cultivating sustainability by producing food using organic gardening, integrated systems, aquaponics, and permaculture farming techniques.
We offer volunteer work exchanges- which ranges between 25-30 hours a week in exchange for food, accommodation, hands-on experience, and yoga classes on our Property.GROL Garden offers volunteer work exchanges- which ranges between 25-30 hours a week in exchange for food, accommodation, hands-on experience, and yoga classes on our Property.
We've had landscapers, laborors, engineers, yoga teachers, massage therapists, artists, chefs, and other skilled individuals who were able to make contributions outside the typical gardening tasks.If this opportunity interests you, please check out our website and facebook page for pictures & more information.Website: www.GROLgarden.infoFacebook:www.facebook.com/GROL.Garden.Girne HISTORYGROL Garden started as a small garden growing cucumbers and sunflowers mid-summer 2012.
While researching information about organic gardening, Ray, the founder, came across Permaculture.
She checked out their website and discovered that they had an upcoming PDC, which she enrolled in along friend Emily Germano.Ray returned to Cyprus in January 2013 and developed a plan to take the Garden in a serious direction.
Since then, GROL has taken on a few managers and hosted over 100 volunteers from around the world.
In 2015, we hope to host educational hands-on workshops as we build our eco-village and set up a food-forest.
To learn more, please Check out our website & fb page:www.GROLgarden.infowww.facebook.com/GROL.Garden.GirneGROL Garden offers volunteer work exchanges- which ranges between 25-30 hours a week in exchange for food, accommodation, hands-on experience, and yoga classes on our Property.
We've had landscapers, laborors, engineers, yoga teachers, massage therapists, artists, chefs, and other skilled individuals who were able to make contributions outside the typical gardening tasks.If this opportunity interests you, please check out our website and facebook page for pictures & more information.Website: www.GROLgarden.infoFacebook:www.facebook.com/GROL.Garden.Girne HISTORYGROL Garden started as a small garden growing cucumbers and sunflowers mid-summer 2012.
While researching information about organic gardening, Ray, the founder, came across Permaculture.
She checked out their website and discovered that they had an upcoming PDC, which she enrolled in along friend Emily Germano.Ray returned to Cyprus in January 2013 and developed a plan to take the Garden in a serious direction.
Since then, GROL has taken on a few managers and hosted over 100 volunteers from around the world.
In 2015, we hope to host educational hands-on workshops as we build our eco-village and set up a food-forest.
To learn more, please Check out our website & fb page:www.GROLgarden.infowww.facebook.com/GROL.Garden.GirneReason: or cancelReason: or cancelNote:The various badges displayed in people profiles are largely honesty-based self-proclamations by the individuals themselves.
There are reporting functions users can use if they know of blatant misrepresentation (for both people and projects).
Legitimacy, competency and reputation for all people and projects can be evidenced and/or developed through their providing regular updates on permaculture work they’re involved in, before/after photographs, etc.
A spirit of objective nurturing of both people and projects through knowledge/encouragement/inspiration/resource sharing is the aim of the Worldwide Permaculture Network.A member is a permaculturist who has never taken a PDC course.
Watch their updates for evaluation.One of these badges will show if you select your gender and the "I'm single, looking for a permaculture partner" option in your profile.People who claim to have taken a Permaculture Design Certificate (PDC) course somewhere in the world.People who have entered an email address for the teacher of their PDC course, and have had their PDC status verified by that teacher.
Watch their updates for evaluation.People who’ve taken a Permaculture Research Institute PDC somewhere in the world.People who claim to teach some version of PDC somewhere in the world.With the exception of the ‘Member’ who has never taken a PDC, all of the above can apply to become a PRI PDC Teacher.
Such teachers also commit to focussing on the design science, and not including subjective spiritual/metaphysical elements.
Permaculture Design education concerns itself with teaching good design based on strategies and techniques which are scientifically provable.PRI PDC Teachers may be given teaching and/or consultancy offerings as they become available as the network grows.The individual with this badge is indicating they are, have, or would like to be involved in permaculture aid work.
Watch their updates for evaluation.The individual with this badge is indicating they are, have, or would like to do paid permaculture design consultancy work.
Watch their updates for evaluation.Community projects are projects that help develop sustainable community interaction and increase localised resiliency.
I notice how the young broadleaf trees Ben planted about ten years ago are doing, many over ten feet tall.
The path has been reinforced by local sandstone and the pond has been excavated for the mud to build cob walls, but the place still holds the sense of sanctuary, a timeless quiet so deep, it's hard to imagine I am approaching what was, until recently, a building site.
It blends in with its surroundings, the most 'natural' house I have ever seen.
I remem-ber the old leaky caravan it replaced, tucked into the side of the woodland and camouflaged green.
I wish that all old leaky caravans that woodland folk have to endure could be replaced by beauties like this!The walls are finished on the outside with wavy edge oak and chestnut boards.
Somehow, it feels like he has reclaimed a part of himself he had to leave behind to pioneer his woodland way.Those were tough days full of mud with only an outdoor solar shower and a walk through the coppice to the twin vault compost toilet.Today, rainwater is collected via copper gutters off the roof and is used for the hot water system via a twin coiled hot water cylinder.
The wood fired Rayburn heats it in winter and there's a solar water panel for the summer.
No more slopping out buckets from under a sink either as the grey water is piped to a reed bed system.There is the strong sense that this house stands in its own landscape, a complete product of Ben's hard-fought vision.
Much of the wood used was grown in Ben's woodland that surrounds the house and the mud for the walls is from his own pond.
Everything else was sourced as locally as possible, and no skip was used to dispose of any waste – indeed there wasn't any – making this one of the most ecologically sound builds in Britain.Ben makes his living from his chestnut coppice and grows much of his own food within the woodland.
Indefatigable, this year he plans to extend his home gardens, grow edible vines up the sides of the house and sink that hot tub in the balcony so he can relax and survey his beautiful permaculture realm!
I don't know anyone else who could deserve that privilege more and, as I listen to Ben's typically robust, spontaneous laugh, I know he won't keep it all to himself.Ben describes how he came to own Prickly Nut Wood in Sussex, his long but successful fight to live in his woodland and build a house there in The Woodland Way.
In this book, he presents a radical alternative to conventional woodland management and demonstrates how to create biodiverse, healthy environments, yield a great deal of value added products, and provide secure livelihoods for woodland workers.
His vision is transforming our perception of woodlands in Britain by marrying low impact living, sustainable livelihoods and conservation within a framework of permaculture design.
The Woodland House, all about how he built his home was published by Permanent Publications in 2004.
The Woodland Year is an intimate account of Ben's yearly cycle of work, his naturally attuned lifestyle and deep emersion in the very fabric of the nature of his woods and these books are all available from the Green Shopping Website.In 2010 Ben built a woodland classroom at the Sustainability Centre and wrote a comprehensive guide to Roundwood Timber Framing, there is also a DVD with the same name that documented the build.The building of Ben's house was the subject of a Channel 4 Grand Designs episode, which can be watched on their website.For information about Ben's products, open days, courses and talks, see www.ben-law.co.uk.
related articlesrelated videosThe No Dig Approach to Dealing with Bindweedrelated reviewsThe material on this website is copyright 2015.
You are not granted any other rights and the Web site owner reserves all other rights.The opinions expressed on this website are not necessarily those of the publisher, Hyden House Ltd, and whilst we take every care in checking the validity of information presented here, we cannot accept any responsibility for its accuracy or any liability for any form of damages incurred by the use of such information.
Please take some time to explore a variety of valuable educational resources– this website is constantly growing!
Add your email to the right hand side, here to be notified of farm events and workshops.____________________________________________DESIGN SERVICES           EDUCATIONAL EVENTS          FARM           PLANT SALE!RETREATSKIDS YOGA(More 2018 events coming soon!
Please SUBSCRIBE/ FOLLOW  ⚡️🙏🏾⚡️)____________________________________________We’re excited to announce a few open spaces in this summer’s Permaculture Design Certification Course– the nation’s leading Farm and Wildlife Immersion PDC.
Centered on Design and Practice, join a diverse group of students from around the country and the world in collaborative design for Real-World Community Projects, hands on at Vermont’s most diverse permaculture farm, research center, and wildlife sanctuary; and gain professional support in developing Designs for Your Own Property!
Participants range from total ‘newbies’ to practicing architects and landscape architects; sustainability and conservation professionals; farmers, chefs, ‘foodies’, extension agents; activists; homesteaders; and design, ecology, and food-systems students.
Facilitated by a diverse, talented, and most experienced teaching team- we provide a solid, science-based foundation for experiential and experimental ecological design education.
Explore Social Entrepreneurship and Ecological Economics directly in Vermont’s booming sustainability/ agricultural economy.____________________________________________We design Landscapes, Buildings, Farms, and deliver Educational Events that assist people and communities to cultivate social and ecological health and respond to the confluent crises of the 21st century with resilience, abundance, and ecological regeneration.We consult with forward-thinking landowners, community organizations, schools, towns, farmers, homesteaders, watershed organizations, land trusts, and others to interpret ecological context and make human-managed ecosystems more connected, beautiful, and productive.
In particular, we assist people in designing the built environment to better grow food, build soil, secure fresh water, harvest the sun, and harmonize with natural communities in very site specific and client tailored ways.
We are the oldest permaculture design firm specializing in working farms, and our portfolio includes some of the the most successful and innovative farms contributing to the resurging agricultural economy in Vermont and beyond.We design, build, and implement greenhouses, root cellars, barns, small homes, guest cabins, food processing facilities, and other infrastructure; windbreaks, hedgerows, orchards, nut groves, productive riparian buffers; ponds, paddies, swales, and other regenerative earthworks.We work out of Northern Vermont with clients throughout the Northeast- from Quebec to NYC and beyond.
While our expertise is in high-performance ecological regeneration, food production, and shelter systems for cold temperate/ arctic conditions, we have designed and implemented systems in New Zealand, Colorado, Chile, Argentina, California, New Mexico, Arizona, Nigeria, Ghana, Denmark, and the Netherlands.-Prospect Rock Permaculture will be incorporating as a ‘Low-Profit, Limited Liability Company ‘(L3C), a legal entity created for socially-responsible businesses which prioritize educational and socially beneficial aims above profit making.-____________________________________________Willow Crossing Farm Design, Diuke farming in Nigeria, Me with Termite Ventilation, Palm Oil Pressing.northeastern permaculture, new england permaculture, vermont permaculture, permaculture design certification courses, permaculture training, advanced permaculture training, advanced permaculture design certification, urban permaculture, ecological design, vermont permaculture course, permaculture design certification course, natural building, living machines, eco-machines, landscape design, landscape architecture, ecological regeneration, participatory ecology, keith morris, keith morris permaculture, keith morris vermont, financial permaculture, seed saving, edible forest gardens, edible forest gardening, nut trees, fruit trees, riparian reforestation, PDC, APDC, Vermont Permaculture Institute, Social Ecology, Debt-Free Farming.
I will also send you a separate email, as I’ve been invited to come down and give a presentation at RISD, and there is a growing contingent of people interested in permaculture and former students of mine there.LikeLikeHi Keith,I’d love to do the tree grafting workshop, but March 17 will not work.
Could meet you in North Bennington.LikeLikelt great the extent you have gone.lt was really great visiting this site.LikeLikeHi there!
It is particularly noteworthy because it grew out of practical application and was relatively detached from the scientific community.Sepp Holzer started reorganising his father's property according to ecological patterns in the early 1960s after he took over the farm.
As an adolescent he conducted layman experiments with plants native to the area and learned from his own observations.Since having taken over his father's property, he has expanded it from 24 to 45 hectares.
[citation needed] according to his  methods together with his wife.His expanded farm now spans over 45 hectares of forest gardens, including 70 ponds, and is said to be the most consistent example of permaculture worldwide.
As a result of these experiments, there is a huge role for animals in the Holzer Permaculture.He has created some of the world's best examples of using ponds as reflectors to increase solar gain for passive solar heating of structures, and of using the microclimate created by rock outcrops to effectively change the hardiness zone for nearby plants.
He has also done original work in the use of Hügelkultur and natural branch development instead of pruning (see Fruit tree pruning) to allow fruit trees to survive high altitudes and harsh winters.It is difficult to make out differences between the methods and practices of Sepp Holzer in contrast to the more scientific and theoretical permacultural mainstream.
Nevertheless, here are some major points to consider:Situated in Ramingstein on the slopes of Mount Schwarzenberg his farm (Krameterhof) lies at varying elevations ranging from 1100 to 1500 metres above sea level.The exceptionally harsh climatic conditions in the area are generally considered inappropriate for farming.
Nevertheless, he has managed to cultivate a variety of crops and even exotic plants like Kiwis and Sweet Chestnut.The Krameterhof is less an operational enterprise, in terms of crop-yield (although it does provide numerous sorts of produce for the community), and more a fully functional showcase or research station for permaculture.Endangered livestock species and rare alpine- and cultural plant species are integrated into the farm.Most of Holzer's books are published in German through Leopold Stocker Verlag, an Austrian publisher in Graz.
While most people think they are mending the world's problems by contemplating light bulbs or buying "organic", there are thousands of people making a more significant difference.
To my knowledge, his farm is, by far, the best example of permaculture.And I was fortunate to study under him for twelve days.Update!
Several of us got together and recorded podcasts rich with information on what we heard and experienced.After watching his videos about 18 times each, and then reshaping about 15 acres of land to be "Sepp Holzer Style" (terraces, ponds, plus lots of trees), it was bizarre to meet him and shake his hand!
Sepp Holzer can get damn near any soil to seal for a pond.
Eventually the trees will outcompete the blackberries.
And a lot of farmers are now blocking their animals from riparian areas.
I run my animals in riparian areas - it is some of the best land!
He then went on to make it clear that he runs his pigs in all of his riparian areas.More about grazing riparian areas.On the first full day of class, we had some classroom time followed by some on-farm time.In the class Sepp Holzer talked about quite a few things, but one of the most important things I remember is that Sepp wanted to make it clear that what he advocates is "Holzer Permaculture" which is different from "Permaculture."
By saying that what he is doing is "Holzer Permaculture" then he can do what he thinks is best without giving a damn about the infinite interpretations of the books of others.On the first full day we toured a farm where the animals had wiped out nearly all growth.
The land owner's intent was to get a fresh start.
Sepp was very direct and did not mince words:  He did not approve.Sepp pointed out how only the trees were left, but since animals had nibbled at the bark so much, he called these trees "standing dead.
"Sepp then told us about how he makes a sort of bone sauce that he puts on trees and will keep the animals from nibbling the trees forever.
)First you start with a cast iron kettle and bury it a bit and put a cup of water in the bottom.
The top of the second pipe will then determine the water level of the pond.
So if you move the monk side to side, you can adjust the depth of the pond.When we were at Mowich farm, Sepp was quick to point at a culvert and holler "catastrophe!"
He then tells a story about how there will be a great rain storm at 2am and the culvert plugs, the water rises, runs over the dam and the dam is destroyed.
Later I asked Josef, who tends to be a bit more humble:  he says that it is true, you can have all sorts of leaves and other debris in the pond and monks just don't seem to plug up.So, I'm thinking about this ...  and I think I can see it ... because 1/16 or 1/8 of an inch of water goes over the edge of the monk and into the monk.
Then debris, which is gonna have some in the water and some out, won't be able to make that tiny, sharp, downard turn.
He's trying to encourage the water to go down the monk as a spiral.
He talks about getting a lot of oxygen in the water.
And he talks about catching fish out of the pond where the water comes out of a monk from a higher pond and dribbles into this pond.
So he will catch fish from the end of the pond where the water dribbles in and from the other end.
The fish from the end with with water coming in have more life and energy than any other fish on his property.
I've heard him tell this story three times, where the fish is so full of life it even leaps out of the pan (no innards and no head).
Sepp has a certain sort of spiritual connection with his land.
And it seems that this whole life force thing involving the spiraling water in the monk is a really big part of it.
I kinda wonder if it is nothing more than the water has a maximum of dissolved oxygen at that point, and that is what makes the fish so lively.
The top of the second pipe will then determine the water level of the pond.
So if you move the monk side to side, you can adjust the depth of the pond.When we were at Mowich farm, Sepp was quick to point at a culvert and holler "catastrophe!"
He then tells a story about how there will be a great rain storm at 2am and the culvert plugs, the water rises, runs over the dam and the dam is destroyed.
Later I asked Josef, who tends to be a bit more humble:  he says that it is true, you can have all sorts of leaves and other debris in the pond and monks just don't seem to plug up.So, I'm thinking about this ...  and I think I can see it ... because 1/16 or 1/8 of an inch of water goes over the edge of the monk and into the monk.
Then debris, which is gonna have some in the water and some out, won't be able to make that tiny, sharp, downard turn.
He's trying to encourage the water to go down the monk as a spiral.
He talks about getting a lot of oxygen in the water.
And he talks about catching fish out of the pond where the water comes out of a monk from a higher pond and dribbles into this pond.
So he will catch fish from the end of the pond where the water dribbles in and from the other end.
The fish from the end with with water coming in have more life and energy than any other fish on his property.
I've heard him tell this story three times, where the fish is so full of life it even leaps out of the pan (no innards and no head).
Sepp has a certain sort of spiritual connection with his land.
And it seems that this whole life force thing involving the spiraling water in the monk is a really big part of it.
I kinda wonder if it is nothing more than the water has a maximum of dissolved oxygen at that point, and that is what makes the fish so lively.
More about Sepp Holzer's ponds with the monk.After watching all of Sepp's videos over and over, and then taking the permaculture design course, I immediately built a bunch of hugelkultur beds and wrote this article:  hugelkultur.In the videos, Sepp's hugelkultur beds were about two to three feet tall.
And the edges are all soil.
Sorry.More about hugelkultur.In one of the videos you see Sepp throwing something into the water and the fishing rising to the surface to eat it.
But ... Sepp takes great pride in not feeding the fish - instead he creates fish food habitat.He pointed out that the people making the video brought the fish food and asked him to feed it to the fish so there can be something more interesting to put on video.Further, he pointed out that most of that pelleted fish food that is used for most aquaculture is made from the dead animals that were often extremely medicated in their last days in an attempt to keep them from dying.
This makes for good air exchange in the water so the water can support more life.
And he will try to reduce berms/huglekulture/trees at the ends.More about Sepp Holzer on Ponds and Wind.Sounds crazy at first, but after he explains it, it makes good sense.It sounds as if he has his own little laboratory.
He tests his animals for parasites.
While there are many factors for this, one of them is that he keep a rich diversity of plants including poisonous plants.
Of course, if you pen an animal up and feed it nothing but "purina animal chow" then you take on the responsibility for the animal's health.More about Sepp Holzer says "plant lots of poisonous plants".First, I know of several people in the permaculture world that have learned to embrace the mole - although not yet the vole.
The mole loosens soil.
The vole kills your baby fruit trees.As with many things, Sepp's position is much richer than this.Sepp has, indeed embraced the mole loosening the soil thing.
But there's more (in a moment).Sepp doesn't have as much trouble with voles because his trees are non-grafted and non-pruned.
Then felt, then pond liner, then more felt and then a meter of dirt.Sepp Holzer's root cellar / animal shelterA look deep insideThe waterproof layersHere is my feeble drawing of my understanding of what is going onTo have an animal shelter instead of a root cellar, just take out the air pipes and leave the front open.The air coming in from below gets chilled by the cooler, deeper dirt and goes up into the root cellar and is then vented out the top.There is one log that is split lengthwise that runs the length of the root cellar, flat side down.
Every third or fourth log has its ends flattened a bit to minimize rolling/shifting after the soil is put on.This drawing above is a pretty close approximation of what Sepp is doing in the pictures.
Another is possible leakage problems that could result from the vent going through the soil.My idea for a modificationA shelter Sepp Holzer built (in one day!)
For now, here are links to a variety of the threads I started while trying to dump my notes while taking the class.More about Sepp Holzer and ants.More about Sepp Holzer never uses lime.More about Sepp Holzer's perennial grain.More about Sepp Holzer uses no irrigation.More about Sepp Holzer on apple trees.For more information, please visit Sepp Holzer's Farm (Der Krameterhof).
"Farming with Nature" is a general view of Sepp's farm.
Plus, sprinkled throughout the book are bits and bobs of very practical permaculture knowledge that are not found in "Sepp Holzer's Permaculture".buy at green-shopping.co.ukbuy at amazon.combuy at amazon.caThis PDC brings together some of the best minds in the permaculture community.
With a variety of backgrounds and areas of expertise, these instructors convey their knowledge during the 2017 Homesteaders permaculture design courseGet the videos4 documentary videos featuring how to build a cob style rocket mass heater and a pebble style one, how to make a shippable core, and many innovative rmh technologies.Get the wood heat DVDsGet the wood heat DVDsDocumentary featuring Hugelkultur, Earthworks and the Bad Boy of Permaculture.
With a pond, a swale and a hugelkultur bed on a terrace.Get the world domination gardening DVDsGet the permaculture playing cards hereGet free access to the most popular rocket mass heaterdesign plans on the market, the 6" Annex Variation.
Ernieand Erica Wisner usually sell these bad boys for 15 bucks butwe are special so they are givin' us this nifty deal!All you have to do is sign up for the dailyish email!Get the free rocket mass heater plansCovering rocket mass heaters, rocket stoves, hot water and a collection of techniques to make wood burning stoves about ten times more efficient.
Some commentary and animation have been added to clarify some of the workshop points, but overall, this is still just a video of a workshop made with a handheld camera.Get the wood burning stove DVDsA "how to" film on raising chickens with nature from hatching to the plate!
From hatching your chicks to feeding your chickens, to building your chicken housing to butchering your chickens to putting them to work in your garden, to cooking chicken and eggs.Get it all hereThis DVD and plans are an introduction to a nifty new design of greenhouses that utilizes many aspects of permaculture!Get it all hereEvery digital document Ernie and Erica currently sell: Rocket Mass Heater plans:four different types of rocket mass heater design plans,Double-Chamber Earthen Oven plans, The Art of Fire ebook,Simple Shelter pdf, and a sneak peek at selections from our upcoming Builder's Guide:-Rocket Mass Heater Builder's Guide (RMHBuilderGuide), Chapter 4 (Operations and Maintenance).Get them hereDVDs, cards, massive podcast gobs, micro documentaries, books, plansand even a teeny tiny jar with cork that is really a jump drive.Get it all hereCOPYRIGHT © 1986-2018paul wheaton permaculture (g+)
It is particularly noteworthy because it grew out of practical application and was relatively detached from the scientific community.Sepp Holzer started reorganising his father's property according to ecological patterns in the early 1960s after he took over the farm.
As an adolescent he conducted layman experiments with plants native to the area and learned from his own observations.Since having taken over his father's property, he has expanded it from 24 to 45 hectares.
[citation needed] according to his  methods together with his wife.His expanded farm now spans over 45 hectares of forest gardens, including 70 ponds, and is said to be the most consistent example of permaculture worldwide.
As a result of these experiments, there is a huge role for animals in the Holzer Permaculture.He has created some of the world's best examples of using ponds as reflectors to increase solar gain for passive solar heating of structures, and of using the microclimate created by rock outcrops to effectively change the hardiness zone for nearby plants.
He has also done original work in the use of Hügelkultur and natural branch development instead of pruning (see Fruit tree pruning) to allow fruit trees to survive high altitudes and harsh winters.It is difficult to make out differences between the methods and practices of Sepp Holzer in contrast to the more scientific and theoretical permacultural mainstream.
Nevertheless, here are some major points to consider:Situated in Ramingstein on the slopes of Mount Schwarzenberg his farm (Krameterhof) lies at varying elevations ranging from 1100 to 1500 metres above sea level.The exceptionally harsh climatic conditions in the area are generally considered inappropriate for farming.
Nevertheless, he has managed to cultivate a variety of crops and even exotic plants like Kiwis and Sweet Chestnut.The Krameterhof is less an operational enterprise, in terms of crop-yield (although it does provide numerous sorts of produce for the community), and more a fully functional showcase or research station for permaculture.Endangered livestock species and rare alpine- and cultural plant species are integrated into the farm.Most of Holzer's books are published in German through Leopold Stocker Verlag, an Austrian publisher in Graz.
Training the next change makersNext level learning for authentic practiceExploring people, projects, and concepts"In attending a Permaculture Institute PDC, Scott and Jason’s relatability, experience, and teaching skills exceeded my expectations.
They were not only able to impart their great wisdom and experience to us, but also their incredible passion for caring for the Earth and its people.
""Obtaining my education and community service diploma was a gratifying experience.
After 20+ years teaching Permaculture Design Courses and Teacher Training Retreats worldwide, we’re evolving curricula to meet the changing needs of people and the planet.
We offer transformative Permaculture Design Courses with some of the most experienced teachers in the world.
Courses are held throughout the United States, Central America, Canada and beyond.Our courses include opportunities for hands-on learning, field trips, real-world design projects, and visits to permaculture demonstration sites.We work with sustainability education centers in locations that provide meaningful context and inspirational settings.Our team of instructors has issued PDC certificates in-person to over 10,000 students worldwide.TBD 2019Longo Mai, Costa Rica$1750Join us in beautiful Costa Rica for this unforgettable permaculture adventure.
Located inside a rainforest preserve with abundant agroforestry, this community is full of tropical fruit and incredible people that will have you inspired and invigorated for the future of humanity.TBD 2019Monteverde, Costa Rica$1950Come learn Permaculture Design at a biodiversity preserve and finca in the world-renowned cloud forest of Costa Rica.
Gorgeous scenery abounds at Valle Escondido Preserve with tropical agro-ecosystems designed and built by a graduate of Permaculture Institute.
Comfortable settings will make learning and helping with farm projects in this course a delightful experience.TBD 2019Saint Louis, Missouri, USA$950This inspiring weekend course is held at multiple community organizations one weekend a month in St. Louis and Ferguson, MO.
The equitable permaculture city is waiting to be born by you in this class.TBD 2019Northern New Mexico, USA$1750Learn the internationally acclaimed permaculture design course curriculum in the enchanting landscape of Northern New Mexico.
With a focus on the resilient home we go into great depth with garden-scale strategies from small animal raising to orcharding and water harvesting.
As more places on earth experience climate extremes, this locale provides a valuable lens to look through.TBD 2019$1,100Permaculture teachers empower people with actionable tools for problem solving and potential creating.
The world needs good teachers and community leaders to solve for and create the future—this teacher training is offered to help you be just that.
This course is packed with learning, from group design projects to local activities (including chocolate making and visiting a heritage banana reserve) to hands-on practice in established tropical food forests—all in conjunction with the life changing Permaculture Design Course curriculum with renowned Permaculture Institute instructorship.Participants stay with a host family in the majority Salvadoran and Nicaraguan refugee village of Longo Mai, located within a rainforest preserve.
A welcoming, authentic, cross-cultural encounter, visitors are not a peripheral spectator here, but valued guests immersed in the friendly life of the village.
It is a very embracing community, full of inspiring stories, tropical fruits, and friendly people.
We are graciously hosted by staff of Escuela de la Tierra located in the village.Ample opportunities to experience Permaculture in action are offered as part of this course:Production gardens, tropical food forests, silvo-pastures, biogas generation, greywater systems, and truly legendary people offer opportunities for learning land and community-based living skills.
There will be abundant time for the paradigm-changing Permaculture Design Course curriculum, hands-on village improvement projects, and a design project for Escuela de la Tierra.
Experiential tours of the Longo Mai craft shops, chocolate workshop, tropical food forests, waterfalls, and other attractions are available on breaks and days off.
Much of Costa Rica has two seasons, wet and dry, and this class will be held during the dry season, which can still experience an afternoon rain here and there.Campesino style meals with tropical foods are offered by the host families.
Course participants are welcome to help with food prep and/or garden work when feasible.
Reasonable accommodation for food allergies can be made, but please contact us in advance so we can plan for you.Contact us for help planning your attendance.Copyright 2018 Permaculture Institute.All rights reserved.
St. Louis, as all cities, are full of potential (as well as amazing work happening right now) and we uncover what it looks like to have a sustainable, stable, and equitable city through group design projects, local and global showcases, and hands-on practice in established urban gardens—all in conjunction with the paradigm-changing Permaculture Design Course curriculum with renowned Permaculture Institute instructorship.Ample opportunities to experience Permaculture in action are offered as part of this course from farmers’ market production gardens, edible forest gardens, rainwater harvesting systems, urban soil building, placemaking installations, and community building.Class material is presented through discussion, slideshow, hands-on skill building, touring Permaculture sites, and interactive activities.Participants receive an internationally recognized Permaculture Design Certificate from Permaculture Institute founded by Bill Mollison and Scott Pittman.
There will be abundant time covering the life-changing Permaculture Design Course curriculum, hands-on projects, and a real-world design project.
Reasonable accommodations for food allergies can be made, but please contact us so we can plan for you.Contact us for help planning your attendance.Copyright 2018 Permaculture Institute.All rights reserved.
The Monteverde cloud forest of Costa Rica is world-renowned and we are delighted to offer a course here at Valle Escondido Preserve, a biodiversity preserve and Permaculture farm.
Former graduates of a Permaculture Institute PDC are our hosts, providing a welcoming environment that provides a glimpse of what can be done with the skillset of the PDC.Participants will stay in the beautiful settings of the preserve, with abundant wild natural systems to learn from all around.
Permaculture demonstrations from aquaculture to tropical agroforestry abound on-site.
We will use the site to build our own skillsets, helping advance the goals of the caretaker.
There will be abundant time for the life-changing permaculture design course curriculum, hands-on village improvement projects, and a design project for Valle Escondido Preserve.
Experiential tours of the preserve and surrounding areas with waterfalls, and other attractions are available on breaks and days off.
This course attracts adult participants of all ages.There are two days off in the middle of the class when participants are free to explore local attractions, including other nature preserves in the area, volcanoes, local towns, or just relaxing at the preserve and enjoying some quiet time.Due to travel distances and timing, please arrive to Liberia, Costa Rica one full day before the class.
The fee is an additional $35-40 one way, paid directly to the driver.Monteverde, Costa Rica is a world-wide destination for it’s beauty and biodiversity.
This location has abundant indoor and outdoor learning spaces to adapt to the weather.Meals will be prepared by the preserve with tropical foods and other delights.
Course participants are welcome to help with food prep and/or garden work when feasible.
Reasonable accommodation for food allergies can be made, but please contact us in advance so we can plan for you.Contact us for help planning your attendance.Copyright 2018 Permaculture Institute.All rights reserved.
Join us to earn your Permaculture Design Course Certificate, get introduced to a variety of practical farmsteading skills, immerse into the daily flow of land-based lifestyle, and learn Permaculture Design with stellar teachers in gorgeous Taos, New Mexico.Permaculture Institute has been teaching the PDC in Northern New Mexico for two decades.
A multitude of locations have been used for this class from ecovillages, long established spiritual communities, and private retreats.Additional educational opportunities are offered, including time spent with traditional farmsteading arts including home-dairying and cheese-making, herbal medicine, topbar beekeeping, and visits to exemplary and evolving permaculture sites located nearby.
There will be abundant time for the life-changing permaculture design course curriculum, hands-on projects, and a real-world design project.
Experiential tours of long established Taos area Permaculture demonstration sites are included in this class.
Contact us for recommended shuttle companies.Northern New Mexico is an international travel hot spot for its natural beauty, culture, and art.
This is big sky country, people have flocked to this area for centuries for inspiration and healing.Meals are included and will be prepared for the class.
Course participants are welcome to help with food prep and/or garden work when feasible.
Reasonable accommodation for food allergies can be made, but please contact us in advance so we can plan for you.Contact us for help planning your attendance.Copyright 2018 Permaculture Institute.All rights reserved.
The Permaculture Design Course (PDC) has been taught globally to hundreds of thousands of people.
It was developed by Bill Mollison to teach the principles and foundations of ecological design to benefit the planet and society.
The certificate attests that the recipient has acquired foundational knowledge of Permaculture, and allows the recipient to use the term in their personal practice.All PDC courses offered throughout the world must follow the same curriculum to assure the integrity of the certification process.
The PDC can be truly life changing and inspiring—we help students activate themselves post-PDC while providing a professional credential to work toward.Students create their own learning plans, allowing one to apply Permaculture to one’s own passions with the guidance of leading edge mentors who provide resources, support, and structure for helping one accomplish positive change.A Diploma of Permaculture Design gives one professional recognition as a permaculture designer and consultant.
Additionally, the field of Education certifies one to teach and offer certificates from Permaculture Institute while making one eligible to be listed on the Teachers’ Registry.The Diploma of Permaculture Design signifies that the recipient:Aspiring Permaculture teachers for PDC’s or more advanced trainingsMotivated college students who would like more practical experienceDesign professionals wanting to enhance their work with Permaculture thinkingLand managers who want professional support as they work on their projectsArtists documenting permaculture practices in their community or around the worldAnyone looking to apply systems thinking and ecological principles to their lifeReady to apply?
Those desiring to apply for the field of Education must declare it at the application stage and complete additional work as follows:For work in rural or urban areas developing and implementing permaculture designs, community facilities, and other physical projects that regenerate the land and human community.For work with populations concerning poverty relief, emergency response, as well as safety and security of human rights and equal access to resources.For developing and promoting local employment, nonmonetary exchange, cash recycling in community, co-op formation, facilitation of new business models, and those financial and business systems that contribute to the well being and sustainability of communities.For work with the built environment, from design to construction, using natural and renewable materials, innovative heating/cooling/lighting techniques, and repurposing and rehabilitation of existing structures.For educational work specifically with children, in schools, summer camps, homeschooling groups, or other activities geared toward educating and providing opportunities for children.For developing technical systems or inventions that improve efficiency, increase sustainability, provide better transport, generate energy, repurpose/recycle materials, conserve resources, and improve the lives of users while protecting or regenerating the environment.For work involving scientific methods to study and document the success, or lack thereof, of techniques and practices to improve landscapes and communities.For development of art and information systems such as placemaking installations, film, photo, print or electronic media, journalism, and authorship relating to permaculture.For developing and trialing alternative governing systems, and/or efforts changing legal structures for the benefit of ecosystems and human rights.For work with ecological restoration techniques, as well as land, species, and resource preservation.For work with non-profits, public land, public institutions and other forms of service to individuals or groups.Ready to apply?
Training the next change makersNext level learning for authentic practiceExploring people, projects, and concepts"In attending a Permaculture Institute PDC, Scott and Jason’s relatability, experience, and teaching skills exceeded my expectations.
They were not only able to impart their great wisdom and experience to us, but also their incredible passion for caring for the Earth and its people.
""Obtaining my education and community service diploma was a gratifying experience.
After 20+ years teaching Permaculture Design Courses and Teacher Training Retreats worldwide, we’re evolving curricula to meet the changing needs of people and the planet.
Permaculture is a word originally coined by Bill Mollison and David Holmgren in the mid 1970’s to describe an “integrated, evolving system of perennial or self-perpetuating plant and animal species useful to man.”Mollison, B. and Holmgren, D. Permaculture One published by Corgi 1978 and since published in 7 languages (now out of print).A more current definition of permaculture, which reflects the expansion of focus implicit in Permaculture One, is ‘Consciously designed landscapes which mimic the patterns and relationships found in nature, while yielding an abundance of food, fibre and energy for provision of local needs.
Thus the permaculture vision of permanent or sustainable agriculture has evolved to one of permanent or sustainable culture.More precisely permaculture is a “design system based on ecological principles” (see below) which provides the organising framework for implementing the above vision.
In this more limited, but important sense it draws together the diverse skills and ways of living which need to be rediscovered and developed to empower us to move from being dependent consumers to becoming responsible producers.In this sense, permaculture is not the landscape, or even the skills of organic gardening, sustainable farming, energy efficient building or eco-village development as such, but can be used to design, establish, manage and improve these and all other efforts made by individuals, households and communities towards a sustainable future.Permaculture is also a world wide network and movement of individuals and groups working in both rich and poor countries on all continents.
Largely unsupported by government or business, these people are contributing to a sustainable future by reorganising their lives and work around permaculture design principles.
In this way they are creating small local changes but ones which are directly and indirectly influencing action in the wider environment, organic agriculture, appropriate technology, communities and other movements for a sustainable world.
After 30 years Permaculture may rank as one of Australia’s most significant “intellectual exports”.In this presentation, David Holmgren explains permaculture ethics and design principles as thinking tools for creatively responding to the energy descent future on a limited planet.
September 12, 2012Food+Drink                          » DirtJonathan BoncekJames Islander Shirley Brown has turned her front yard into a permaculturist's dream with productive plants and a sustainably designed garden.Permaculture may conjure up images of drum circles and people of the patchouli persuasion, but it's much more than a hippie lifestyle handbook.
In fact, many people are practicing its principles without even realizing it.
If you've recycled, composted, planted a garden, bartered with a neighbor, or canned vegetables, you are already on the road to becoming a permaculturalist.
Although the definition is as ever-changing as the environment it seeks to imitate, permaculture is an ecological design system that aims to create efficiency using three main tenets: take care of the earth, take care of the people, and share the surplus.
At the most recent meeting of the Charleston Permaculture Guild, attendees ranged in age from 20 to over 60, a diverse group of people who work in affordable housing, agriculture, medicinal herbs, and computer science.
Chris Carnevale, a co-founder of the guild, admits that he was surprised at the mix of people that attend Charleston meetings compared to the more granola audience he saw in Colorado.
"Our membership is over 120 people, and it is very diverse.
Shirley Brown, a retired nurse, attended the meeting to share her firsthand experience transforming her James Island yard into a food forest.
The main mission for most of the plants in her garden is to provide healthy organic food for her family.
After only a year, she boasts over 25 fruit trees, 11 blueberry bushes, seven blackberry vines, 40 varieties of herbs, and traditional garden crops.
Dominick Giordano has worked with Brown and other homeowners to integrate permaculture principles into their landscapes and lifestyles.
The two are hoping to garner support for a permaculture learning center that will serve as a demonstration site and living laboratory.
"If we can observe nature and how it works most effectively," he says, "and use the knowledge it provides to consciously mimic its processes, obtain a better yield with less work, conserve resources and leave no trace of waste — then we have learned the proper dance."
Thane Hollington was attracted to permaculture for its use of technology to save energy, which led to his company Solar Hot Water Works.
Hollington harnesses the elements to provide a clean and cost-effective source of energy.
After reading The Omnivore's Dilemma, his interest in permaculture expanded until he found himself wanting to create his own power, food, water, and soil.
At home, Hollington is working toward energy and food independence, but he admits it's a challenge to bring it to the farm scale.
Shawn Jadrnicek has taken the leap from residential permaculture to the Clemson Student Organic Farm, where he is currently the farm manager.
"[Permaculture] is a tool for designing the landscape and your life in a way that is harmonious with each other and nature, which results in less work and more savings."
He also admits that while it involves planning, design, and investment up front, it will allow you to live a lifestyle that is "frugal and lazy" because it lets the natural systems do all the work.
With a degree in biology and years of experience in landscape and irrigation design/installation, Jadrnicek's approach to permaculture is very practical, which has allowed him to connect with skeptical audiences.
The audience of predominately older male farmers was soon furiously scribbling notes as he walked them through everything from site layout and building orientation to rainwater collection and pond management.
His ability to name the size and type of irrigation fittings while giving cost saving calculations is enough to convince any skeptic of the value behind permaculture design.
If nothing else, creating a self-sufficient homestead and strong community is the ultimate insurance policy against a bad economy, natural disaster, or worst-case scenario, zombie apocalypse.
By Brian Barth on April 19, 2016Bill MollisonNicolás Boullosa, FlickrIf you’ve been in the world of organic farming and gardening for long enough, you eventually bump into a strange word: permaculture.
Mysterious as it may sound, permaculture is a fairly simple idea and its manifestations are everywhere you look.Maybe it came up during a dinner party: “I was just at this permaculture farm and they were planting mashua under their locust trees.” Or maybe a friend just came back from a permaculture course: “Dude, I am totally transformed!
I’m moving to Kauai to join a community where they grow jojoba for biodiesel.
Is permaculture a gardening technique or a special approach to farming, like biodynamics?
Is it some type of back-to-the-land, off-the-grid intentional community?
Is it about sustainable architecture, aquaponics, philosophy, horticulture, design?
Permaculture is all that and then some, which is why it’s so hard for anyone to capture what it means in one neat sentence.Bill Mollison, the Tasmanian son of a fisherman who first coined the term 1978, defined “permaculture” as: “The conscious design and maintenance of agriculturally productive systems which have the diversity, stability, and resilience of natural ecosystems.
It is the harmonious integration of the landscape with people providing their food, energy, shelter and other material and non-material needs in a sustainable way.” In other words, permaculture is a holistic, living-in-harmony-with-nature worldview, as well as technical approach for how to do so.
Mollison eventually became a professor of biogeography and environmental psychology at the University of Tasmania, where he met David Holmgren, a graduate student at the time, who helped him develop the principles and practices that are now taught around the world in the standard Permaculture Design Course, typically a two-week immersive experience held on a farm or property that has been developed with a permaculture approach.
The root word “permanent” is intended as a reference to sustainability—an unsustainable society would, by definition, eventually cease to exist; it would be impermanent.
His work has been widely critiqued for its scientific validity, as have his followers for their cultural subversiveness and inability to explain what the word even means.Though its practitioners may be worthy of a Portlandia spoof, the proof of permaculture’s influence in the mainstream is everywhere.None of that has stopped permaculture from being highly influential in the discourse of sustainable agriculture and green lifestyles.
I was a die-hard devotee in my early twenties, eventually earning my Permaculture Teacher’s Certificate and offering courses on everything from designing food forests to building bio-swales on the farm in California where I once lived (in a yurt for which I bartered my labor for rent).
Though its practitioners may be worthy of a Portlandia spoof with all their talk about herbs spirals and mandala gardens, the proof of permaculture’s influence in the mainstream is everywhere: its basic tenets are embedded in every idea about sustainability that blares from the television or the menu of a farm-to-table restaurant.
Here are five of its more well-known principles to help you understand what permaculture is all about.Any system that provides for its own energy needs is inherently sustainable.
This concept can be extended beyond things like biofuels and solar power to what permaculturists call “inputs,” like food and fertilizer.
For example, rather than importing fertilizer to a farm or garden, the system could be designed to provide for its own fertility needs—perhaps from livestock manure or cover crops.
And if you’re raising livestock, you should certainly aspire to provide all the food for your animals from on-site, whether raising grain, forage crops, or recycling kitchen waste as animal feed.
Any permaculturist worth their salt would remind you that a successful closed loop system “turns waste into resources” and “problems into solutions.” “You don’t have a snail problem, you have a duck deficiency,” Mollison was fond of saying, which makes perfect sense if you’ve ever seen how gleefully ducks wolf down snails.Permies aren’t the only ones to recognize that tilling the ground once or twice a year isn’t particularly good for the soil.
Agroforestry, the cultivation of edible tree crops and associated understory plants, is emphasized—think shade-grown coffee or cacao plantations in South America.
The only problem is that few crops that most of us eat are perennials; but there is no doubt that if we could replace all the monocultures of corn, soy, and wheat in the world with agroforestry systems (while still feeding the world), agriculture which be much more sustainable.One of the more original ideas of permaculture is that every component of a structure or a landscape should fulfill more than one function.
The idea is to create an integrated, self-sufficient system through the strategic design and placement of its components.
For example, if you need a fence to contain animals, you might design it so that it also functions as a windbreak, a trellis, and a reflective surface to direct extra heat and light to nearby plants.
A rain barrel might be used to raise aquatic food plants and edible fish, in addition to providing water for irrigation.
Permies call this “stacking functions.”Water conservation is a major focus on permaculture farms and gardens, where the earth is often carefully sculpted to direct every last drop of rain toward some useful purpose.
This may take the form of terraces on steep land; swales on moderately sloped land (which are broad, shallow ditches intended to capture runoff and cause it to soak into the ground around plantings); or a system of canals and planting berms on low swampy ground.
The latter is modeled on the chinampas of the ancient Aztecs, an approach to growing food, fish, and other crops in an integrated system, often heralded by permaculturists as the most productive and sustainable form of agriculture ever devised.The permaculture creed is perhaps best captured in the Mollisonian mantras of “working with, rather than against, nature” and of engaging in “protracted and thoughtful observation, rather than protracted and thoughtless labor.” On a practical basis, these ideas are carried out with things like chicken tractors, where the natural scratching and bug-hunting behavior of hens is harnessed to clear an area of pests and weeds in preparation for planting—or simply planting mashua under your locust trees.
Locust trees are known for adding nitrogen to the soil, while mashua, a vining, shade tolerant root crop from the Andes, needs a support structure to grow on.
Thus, the natural attributes of the locust eliminate the need to bother with fertilizer or building a trellis, while providing shade, serving as a nectar source for bees and looking pretty.
By letting nature do the work of farming and gardening for you, one achieves another of Mollison’s famous maxims: “maximizing hammock time.”Modern Farmer Media, 2018
Come When You Can | Start When You Can | Pay When...A one and a half hour presentation by a member of our team will be given followed by a suburban permaculture food forest garden...Free Introduction to Permaculture **HOSTED AT THE NAPPY SHOPPE PLANO** A one and a half hour presentation by a team member of the School...Join experienced nutrition advocate Nicole Rice as she teaches you how to craft fermented beverages!
This class be exploring traditional and contemporary twists on fermented...A one and a half hour presentation by a member of our team will be given followed by a suburban permaculture food forest garden...Join experienced nutrition advocate Nicole Rice as she teaches you how to move beyond the basics of Lacto-fermenting.
Come When You Can | Start When You Can | Pay When You Can Many students...A one and a half hour presentation by a member of our team will be given followed by a suburban permaculture food forest garden...Join experienced nutrition advocate Nicole Rice as she teaches spring seasonal cooking techniques.
Nicholas will be sharing about permaculture,...A one and a half hour presentation by a member of our team will be given followed by a suburban permaculture food forest garden...MARK your calendar!
Project to be decided… Volunteer Wednesday: Help out...PERMACULTURE is defined as the development of agricultural ecosystems intended to be sustainable and self-sufficient.
I heard it once described as recreating an environment...A one and a half hour presentation by a member of our team will be given followed by a suburban permaculture food forest garden...MARK your calendar!
Have fun meet others in the area who love...“Gardening is not just about putting plants in the ground the same way architecture is not only concerned with plumbing.” ~ Nicholas Burtner PERMACULTURE...A one and a half hour presentation by a member of our team will be given followed by a suburban permaculture food forest garden...Registered herbalist and creator of the Hill College Holistic Wellness Pathway, Lori Valentine Rose, PhD, CNP, RH (AHG), teaches this hands-on herbal first aid...School of Permaculture will be exhibiting at the Fair, stop by and say Hello!
Come When You Can | Start When You Can | Pay When You Can Many students...On this tour we will have Kelly from “Coffee with Kelley Joy” over and she will be doing a facebook live interview with Nicholas....Local Wild Edibles Class Join Robin Jones on a Wild Edibles walk to learn the most common plants that grow in the Texoma area...Plano, TX | Ben Franklin, TX214-856-8477[email protected]Developed by Digi Interacts Pvt Ltd.
Register nowOur mission is to love and help as many people as we can.
“Personally, I not only want to delivery extreme value to our students, but once they graduate, I want them to be positively uplifted…”School of Permacultureis a non profit educational organization which focuses on the education of individuals and groups to re-learn how to work and harmonize with natural systems for every day living needs (housing, food, clean water, community, etc…).
We achieve this through combining sustainable ancient wisdom, appropriate technology, and by providing training through courses, consultations, and aid work.Sustainably regenerative farming, suburban, urban, and village projects are showcased, so no matter what your walk in life is, a design that propels you to freedom can be achieved.
This allows your mind to be properly prepared and ready for the further acquisition of the skills you need to truly change your life.The way we achieve this is by recommending that you take the 72 hour internationally recognized Permaculture Design Course as your first course.
Register nowis a non profit educational organization which focuses on the education of individuals and groups to re-learn how to work and harmonize with natural systems for every day living needs (housing, food, clean water, community, etc…).
We achieve this through combining sustainable ancient wisdom, appropriate technology, and by providing training through courses, consultations, and aid work.Sustainably regenerative farming, suburban, urban, and village projects are showcased, so no matter what your walk in life is, a design that propels you to freedom can be achieved.School of Permaculture is also a ministry which, being Christ centered, has Jesus at the heart of our organization.
All walks of faith, people, and organizations, christian or other, are welcome as we stay true to our calling which is to love and help as many people as we can, regardless of their walk.Most people say that permaculture courses change their life.
This allows your mind to be properly prepared and ready for the further acquisition of the skills you need to truly change your life.The way we achieve this is by recommending that you take the 72 hour internationally recognized Permaculture Design Course as your first course.
We call this stage “skilling up”and it is when you are truly getting involved and learning hands on.You may have many of these skill sets already and just need to learn how to put them all together in the permaculture design course or are starting from scratch and wanting to learn as much as you can.
But please, feel free to take our recommendation with starting with the permaculure design course or feel free to start with a skills course.
We look forward to adding true value to your life and skilling you up.Some of the courses and classes we offer are:Current Course Offering:Plano, TX | Ben Franklin, TX214-856-8477[email protected]Developed by Digi Interacts Pvt Ltd.
School of Permaculture provides aid to orphanages, kids homes, women’s shelters, and truly struggling agricultural farms (called aid sites) by redesigning their environments and providing truly empowering training and site design.
Our  focus is not on just providing funds for feeding people or building homes, but a focus on empowerment and regenerative sustainability.
We work to get the aid sites off of the I.V.
of funding and into real world self reliance where they are:Each aid site is unique in it’s own needs but our overall goal is to provide the necessary training, usually a 12 day course, as well as offer hands on assistance in development of the site.
If funds are raised for the site then that also goes to helping with the installation of the project.
Our mission is to be of service to those in need and for all parties to feel good about what they are doing and have a great time being involved.How to get involved:Site eligibility:If you are an orphanage or other type of aid site that is seeking sustainable assistance, this list of criteria will help.~Please share this page on your social media networks and make sure to sign up to our Mailing ListPlano, TX | Ben Franklin, TX214-856-8477[email protected]Developed by Digi Interacts Pvt Ltd.
Permaculture Training Online PioneersOne tiny change can be a fun way to reduce waste, provide food, and connect with nature.
Small solutions may appear to be whimsical yet they are inherently robust when well-designed.
These tiny designs have the capacity to give you the tools, skills and understanding to make a lasting change.
One of the greatest challenges is the bird-life.
We love being close to nature but we also want to grow some food for ourselves.
Generations of wild-life enjoy easy pickings from our permaculture garden.
With good design tools we out-smart them.
We get to benefit from their manure and let them eat the foods that grow outside the cages.Boundaries and constraints often give rise to creativity.
For years, we have used re-purposed bird-cages to protect delicate plants.
In the intensive-care corner of the garden we often made wicking pots to nurture young rare plants.
The tray is the water reservoir, the base holds our bio-char and compost which we mounded in the middle to increase surface area.
Small gardens can be highly intensive.
If you find a weed you have simply found a wasted space.The cage acts two ways: as a support for young shoots and protection from wildlife .
This concept of multiple-uses is another principle of permaculture.Everlasting foodsNew plants, like ginger, grow from selected green buds on fresh pieces at the grocery store.
We see the true value of the foods that we love.High levels of nutrition in a small space with little effort comes from sprouts and micro-greens.
Within days, you have fresh food ready to eat raw or cooked.
This food can be grown inside, even during winter.
As long as they do not get too cold over night and are rinsed in luke-warm water each day, they supply nutritious fresh food.Balconies all around the world connect people with the outside world.
Imagine if these balconies grew some of their favourite foods, gave them more privacy and a mini sanctuary.
What joy they would find in their tiny food forest.If you want to learn more about Balcony design, tiny bird-house gardens, bio-char, wicking or Permaculture living you can join a workshop, sign up as a hybrid student (online and on-site) or enrol with us online.
We are proud of our graduates and the new Moodle is designed to keep them engaged and support their post-graduate work.Student focused learning is a fun way to teach.
It has enabled us to reach people in remote places.
Creating a personalised design takes skill, not just information.
We aim work to develop student skills in designing, as well as the vital knowledge on how it the pieces work.To celebrate our new Moodle, we now are offering a special deal of 10% off.
Our new Moodle gives you a speedy way to upload your files, get the design learning completed and do the quiz to check the efficiency of your first design.
Keith Mikkelson of Palawan in the Philippines, uploaded his work, completed the design check process, got personalised feedback on the design and was awarded his certificate swiftly.
There is also the bonus of staying supported s a graduate.You can design an ethical, healthy lifestyle to help build a truly sustainable culture.
Permaculture design promotes things that are multi-functional rather than things that have only one use.
Whereas fish knife is only designed for fish.
Without this specialist skill we could get cold fish with hidden little bones.A building can be masterfully designed to be multi-functional.
As a result, we can have natural light to illuminate many activities.
The roof can collect water and shed debris.
Contrast this with a permaculture lifestyle where we explore new ideas.
Growing food at home, connecting with others, learning from elders and reconnecting with nature helps us develop a range of skills that are productive and rewarding.Enjoy our new moodle Elearning program today.
The design concepts by Mollison and Holmgren first appeared with Permaculture One.
What unites permaculture designers is their ability to design and their pioneering spirit.
Permaculture design is a patient art.
Their fledgling design projects integrating solar energy, rocket-stoves, rain-gardens, composting toilets, worm-farms, rain-water tanks, mulch and yoghurt or Kombucha have become household realities.After 40 years some of these glorious pioneers may have slowed down.
Some, such as the eternal optimist, Bill Mollison has returned to mother nature.
The younger, David Holmgren has now matured into co-operative living.Holmgren and his partner, Sue, have cleverly downsized the personal space and expanded their options by sharing the rewards and ongoing physical work of their productive home site.Some of the permaculture-designed pioneering communities, like Malaney, have now installed their own graveyards.The beauty of permaculture design lies in its ability to adapt and respond to change.
“Permaculture gives us a toolkit for moving from a culture of fear and scarcity to one of love and abundance” Toby HemenwayJanet Millington defined her twilight period as her personal energy descent period.
She pioneered wicking beds with integrated worm-farms to intensify food production and waste management close to the kitchen door without any back strain.
In fact, every elder in our community has a wealth of experience directly relevant to our community and our unique bio-region.Permaculture designers around the planet are busy.
They are the type of people who would rather do stuff rather than talk about it.
Invest time to travel about to see what the pioneers have put into practice and how they have designed their twilight lifestyle.Soon we are leading a grand Permaculture Tour.
The sun burns bright overhead while people turn on the air-conditioning in their kitchen.
Despite the impressive range of affordable solar cook-tops and ovens, few people use solar ovens.
A Solar oven wastes nothing – the slow cook version does not waste a single drop of water or spice.
But I still prefer the old faithful that has survived being caught in the rain and filled up with water.Solar ovens are durable, free to run, simple to make and easy to use and repair.Best of all solar cooked food is flavoursome and nutritious.
By revisiting our ethics and values at the end of the year we can keep the positive fire burning.By listening to our feelings and passions we give ourselves the energy to create a better future.
Once our passion is invested in our future, we can find energy to develop goals, and sustain the plans and activities.Hill urges us to:  “Act from your core/essential self – empowered, aware, visionary, principled, passionate, loving, spontaneous, fully in the present (contextual) – vs. your patterned, fearful, compensatory, compromising, de-contextual selves”Every person is different.
No two permaculture designers will have the same passions and goals.
]Discover your core principles and enjoy the discovery.Happy new year from us at Permaculture Visions.Growing up in a gorgeous permaculture garden builds some unusual adult expectations.
Our children played with worms, cuddled chickens, climbed trees, nibbled on flowers and sometimes fell into patches of stinging nettle.
Confined to a totally indoor existence, his idea for an indoor worm-farm was conceived.Our first worm-farm towers were developed by one of our permaculture design course graduates, Robyn Crossland.
The worm-farm adventure is ever developing.We looked at old worm-farm systems which are pretty cool and decided to create a tiny version.
The coffee-addict indoor worm farm was the smallest prototype.
Then we up-sized to an old kitchen bin.Even though we have plenty of space outdoors, we didn’t expect the indoor worm-farm to be so convenient.
The waste items that are not suitable for the poultry (such as banana peels) go directly into the worm-farm.
Rotting food smells bad.
How could worms living in the food waste possibly be worse than that?The first challenge is to learn what can be put into the worm-farm.
If you are going on a vacation, fill up the bin with fallen leaves and weeds from the street or your potted plants.Follow the instructions for a Basic Worm farm then add plants on top.
If you want fast composting, make a black soldier larvae farm.
[Don’t have a larvae farm indoors without really strict hygiene controls].What Kills Worms?Like everything else, neglect is one of the biggest killers for pets.
Indoor worms are likely to die from too much liquid, too little food or too much food.
Avoid sprays and cleaners entering the worm bin.Happy Worming!Permaculture strives to design a healthier environment and society.
Regenerative farming has come along quickly but  social permaculture designs have been a bit slower to emerge.
Freeing people of toxic chemicals, and poor work conditions has resounding benefits.In salons around the world, customers pay a small fortune to look good.
” He noticed “the green chemistry colours also have a shinier, more natural feeling results…Previously, I used to have chemical reactions to other colours, ie itchy hands/skin, skin peeling and puffy itchy face.
This is where it pays to do a little bit of designing.
Permaculture Zoning gives you the design tools to make life more comfortable and work more efficiently.
We have a tool that can sort things into zones according to how much we need them, and in return, how much they need our care.Some things need to be close-by because we use them often.
These also include a nesting robin, or the soft yoga mat in your sports bag.There are a few basic factors to help us determine which is the right zone for something.
If the answers are rarely, put it far away.This design tool is super flexible.
You can apply the zoning tool to your design for a farm, a home, a community garden or a work station.
You can even use it to pack your luggage.When Bill Mollison was introducing the concept of Zoning as a design tool, he talked about having food plants that were needed regularly near the kitchen door.These include herbs and plants like lettuces and kale that we can clip each day rather than rip it out of the ground.
Zone thinking can also be applied to the design of your bag.
Whereas, things that are rarely used but handy in emergencies can dwell in the outer zones.Zones don’t have to be separated.
In zone 1 we keep regularly used and valuable items.
On the farm, Zone 1 might hold your dog’s box, your pick-up truck, your trusty tools and your favourite wet weather coat.
In Zone 2 you will find intensively grown food-plants and the smaller species of fruiting shrubs.
The hen-house might sit in this zone to help manage weeds in the orchard and provide regular eggs.
Bigger trees, pumpkin vines and corn patches site well in Zone 3 and larger farm animals go well in the Zone 3 or 4 area.
Zone 5 is a great space to dedicate to wildlife which thrives on careful management and minimal disturbance.Zone 0 is traditionally indoors or in your head where all those secret recipes dwell and where you hone your powerful ethics and motivation.
But In a house design or on a farm, zone 0 can also contain ferments, indoor production and work stations, the office and first aid.As you can see, there are a lot of design tools taught through Permaculture.
Learn more design tools with a Permaculture Design Course.
We offer courses online and on-site.SaveSaveDid you know the nutritional value of many foods improves with fermentation?
It seems there are ample reasons to enjoy fermenting your food.Ferments ooze abundantly in the wild.
Unfortunately, few people today know how to brew their own.
Yet traditional brews bubble in every corner of the world.
For many people in the western world, the cultures and ferments of choice are bread, alcohol (beer, wine, cider, Perry, liquors), vinegar, tea, coffee chocolate, olives, yogurt, bread and cheese.Ultimately, fermentation enriches food with essential amino acids, vitamins, newly available minerals and bio-active compounds.
These enzymes break down some of the tough compounds, making the food easier to digest.
By fermenting tough foods like cassava, lactic acid bacteria detoxifies any potentially poisonous substances.
Serving continuously over 20 years, we have tutored participants from more than 65 countries.Through Permaculture education we can all create a better world – cleaner water and air, fresher food, rich wild-life habitat, healthy hearts and empowered  communities.
We simply listened and responded to our students needs.We have built a huge course database that showcases excellent work by international projects and students worldwide.Do you need someone to motivate you?
We are inspired by the vision of pioneers such as Bill Mollison, David Holmgren, Rosemary Morrow, Jude and Michel Fanton, Robyn Francis and many other great Permaculture innovators worldwide.With decades of experience we have developed unique methods to teach permaculture certificates and diplomas online.
We regularly generate free information, commentary, photos, illustrations, cartoons and designs to celebrate permaculture.
Permaculture designs healthy living systems based on natural solutions.
Our organic and productive Demonstration site has developed several happy innovations.
We are actively working in our mature permaculture site and community, Silk Farm.
Our vision is a better future for everyone by living and working sustainably with nature.Here is a testimonial from one of our customers: “Thank you for a wonderful experience at Permaculture Visions.
Blyth McManus Maryland, US”“This subject changed the course of my life” Belinda PAll of the work at Permaculture Visions is carried out without grants or external supports.
Ultimately, this course is designed to give you skills and confidence to make your own permaculture design.Here your learning fun begins!Tell us a little about yourself:Enrol with our world leading teaching project, get your own mentor, work at your own pace and become empowered in permaculture.There are just a few steps for enroling in your course of a lifetime.
If you want to know about other currencies, or special discounts for couples and groups, simply contact us.Name:*Country of ResidenceAfghanistanAlbaniaAlgeriaAmerican SamoaAndorraAngolaAntigua and BarbudaArgentinaArmeniaAustraliaAustriaAzerbaijanBahamasBahrainBangladeshBarbadosBelarusBelgiumBelizeBeninBermudaBhutanBoliviaBosnia and HerzegovinaBotswanaBrazilBruneiBulgariaBurkina FasoBurundiCambodiaCameroonCanadaCape VerdeCayman IslandsCentral African RepublicChadChileChinaColombiaComorosCongo, Democratic Republic of theCongo, Republic of theCosta RicaCôte d'IvoireCroatiaCubaCyprusCzech RepublicDenmarkDjiboutiDominicaDominican RepublicEast TimorEcuadorEgyptEl SalvadorEquatorial GuineaEritreaEstoniaEthiopiaFijiFinlandFranceGabonGambiaGeorgiaGermanyGhanaGreeceGreenlandGrenadaGuamGuatemalaGuineaGuinea-BissauGuyanaHaitiHondurasHong KongHungaryIcelandIndiaIndonesiaIranIraqIrelandIsraelItalyJamaicaJapanJordanKazakhstanKenyaKiribatiNorth KoreaSouth KoreaKuwaitKyrgyzstanLaosLatviaLebanonLesothoLiberiaLibyaLiechtensteinLithuaniaLuxembourgMacedoniaMadagascarMalawiMalaysiaMaldivesMaliMaltaMarshall IslandsMauritaniaMauritiusMexicoMicronesiaMoldovaMonacoMongoliaMontenegroMoroccoMozambiqueMyanmarNamibiaNauruNepalNetherlandsNew ZealandNicaraguaNigerNigeriaNorwayNorthern Mariana IslandsOmanPakistanPalauPalestinePanamaPapua New GuineaParaguayPeruPhilippinesPolandPortugalPuerto RicoQatarRomaniaRussiaRwandaSaint Kitts and NevisSaint LuciaSaint Vincent and the GrenadinesSamoaSan MarinoSao Tome and PrincipeSaudi ArabiaSenegalSerbia and MontenegroSeychellesSierra LeoneSingaporeSlovakiaSloveniaSolomon IslandsSomaliaSouth AfricaSpainSri LankaSudanSudan, SouthSurinameSwazilandSwedenSwitzerlandSyriaTaiwanTajikistanTanzaniaThailandTogoTongaTrinidad and TobagoTunisiaTurkeyTurkmenistanTuvaluUgandaUkraineUnited Arab EmiratesUnited KingdomUnited StatesUruguayUzbekistanVanuatuVatican CityVenezuelaVietnamVirgin Islands, BritishVirgin Islands, U.S.YemenZambiaZimbabweEmail:*Enter EmailConfirm EmailWhich course would you like?Select the course you want to enrol in.
","decimals":2},"base_url":"https:\/\/www.permaculturevisions.com\/wp-content\/plugins\/gravityforms","number_formats":[],"spinnerUrl":"https:\/\/www.permaculturevisions.com\/wp-content\/plugins\/gravityforms\/images\/spinner.gif"};jQuery(document).bind('gform_post_render', function(event, formId, currentPage){if(formId == 1) {gf_global["number_formats"][1] = {"9":{"price":false,"value":false},"5":{"price":false,"value":false},"27":{"price":false,"value":false},"6":{"price":false,"value":false},"13":{"price":false,"value":false},"51":{"price":"decimal_dot","value":false},"50":{"price":false,"value":false},"24":{"price":false,"value":false},"47":{"price":false,"value":false},"52":{"price":false,"value":false}};if(window["gformInitPriceFields"]) jQuery(document).ready(function(){gformInitPriceFields();} );} } );jQuery(document).bind('gform_post_conditional_logic', function(event, formId, fields, isInit){} ); jQuery(document).ready(function(){jQuery(document).trigger('gform_post_render', [1, 1]) } ); Thank you for being part of the world-wide effort to create a better future for all.CLICK HERE TO START YOUR COURSE NOWHere is a quick sketch illustrating how our system works.
Permaculture VisionsPermaculture Training Online PioneersPermaculture Visions is the brainchild, dedicated homesite and teaching project started by April Sampson-Kelly.
April started by researching, designing, nurturing, planting, writing, photographing, painting and then teaching permaculture online and face-to-face worldwide in 1993.April was trained in Permaculture by Jude and Michel Fanton and Rosemary Morrow.
Her early supporters and mentors were : Bill Mollison, Janet Millington and Geoff Lawton.“In the early days most people argued you couldn’t teach a practical skill such as permaculture online, now everyone wants to do it.
Our home and office for our worldwide teaching project is based within our beautiful Demonstration Site.
We cherish our close contact with the bushland and have a strong appreciation of our surrounding forests and animals.
20 years ago we wanted to raise our children close to nature and in a caring community so we decided to dedicate a significant part of our professionaloff-site incomes and personal energy to building a small food forest which is now starting to mature, has won some awards and has always offered us sanctuary, education, entertainment and food in return.
Our personal interests lie in growing unusual food plants especially berries.” The Kelly family.
It gives you a good grounding on permaculture principles and tools and ideas for what you can do right now in your everyday home life.
It has twenty chapters with a broad range of design topics ranging from ethics to understanding soils, appropriate technology, useful patterns, Natural systems, and community infrastructure.
Many people yearn to learn more and find our course gives them a great back-up resource.
Apply to your tutor for information or use our contact form.Hybrid CoursesSome people enjoy doing workshops and hands-on learning with their tutor.
And we follow the topics in the curricula designed by Bill Mollison with extra topics involving technology developments such a topic about Energy and Social Structures.Our notes are well-tested plain English.
They stand alone and can help you through heavier textbooks such as the Permaculture Design Handbook by Bill Mollison.We celebrate contributions from students and graduates and review the notes regularly in response to student feedback.This is our continual quality loop involving past students and graduates worldwide with some Translations in Spanish, Russian and French.
Skills + Empowerment = ResilienceJoin us on Sunday September 16th as our food forest will be open for you to come and tour as part of Sustainable House Day.
If you know our site …Read More “Sustainable House Day”Join us on Sunday September 16th as our food forest will be open for you to come and tour as part of Sustainable House Day.
If you know our site …This Sunday 2pm til 4.30pm we are designing a Balcony as a place to cook, eat and relax and have a little food forest.
The Main Focus will be: Touring …Read More “Balcony Dreaming”This Sunday 2pm til 4.30pm we are designing a Balcony as a place to cook, eat and relax and have a little food forest.
Permaculture VisionsPermaculture Training Online PioneersIn 1993 we began with an acre of lawn in an arty village community close to the University city of Wollongong.
We wanted to build a rich permaculture lifestyle.
There were large tracts of woody weeds and we didn’t know how to catch a chicken, graft a seedling, manage snails or pickle a chilli.We were the first in our bio-region to grow Jackfruit, Peruvian custard apple, Lychee, Longan, Sapodilla, Jabuticaba and much, much more.
Since raising our sons on this site we are proud that our eldest is now also a first.
He has established an eco-hair salon on our site.We are just ordinary people having fun trying extra-ordinary things!
After 25 years the lawn has been replaced by an abundant food forest.As the family grew we renovated the home using recycled components, created an environmentally friendly office, and have become an active part of the community.
Our site is most famous for it’s rare fruits, Chicken Mansion, and Potted worm farms.
Recently some have been spotted but the water in the creeks is low due to the impact of long wall mining below.
The local mine is the site of our nation’s first industrial disaster in 1902 where more than 90 workers were killed due to open flame style gas lamps.
This site is sloped to the west with limited solar access or wind.
It was severely compacted pasture with some mature orchard trees.
In a nutshell, ours is a sloped, shady, humid and warm site with valley breezes.In Permaculture design, we do a sector analysis to learn where the different natural energy sources are on the site and from there we work out what is the best use of this energy.Natural Oddities: Fungi and lichen, self-seeding trees including strangler and sandpaper figs carried by the wide variety of birds (wrens, bower birds, Kookaburras, Cockatoos, King Parrots, Owls, Cat-birds and Brush Turkey).
The Cockatoos and Flying Foxes are active pruners and eat fruit that is well out of our reach.
Other residents include Sugar Gliders, lizards, water dragons and larger possums.
Flying Foxes come early in summer and eat a lot of the fruits and berries.
Non-natives include feral deer, neighbours cows, dogs, chickens, mice and sometimes horses.Site history: The site had a few very large and bountiful plum, peach and apple trees.
At the bottom of the garden lies a natural wetlands, which has been preserved for the diversity value and as a good firebreak.
The land use had involved market gardening, cattle, horses and poultry farm.Our Organic PracticesThere was a high possibility that toxics sprays were used on this site.
So, we avoided growing and eating tubers from the soil for the first 15 years.
We have managed all weeds (see notes on weeds below) without any chemicals.Soil type: When we started here the soil was badly compacted solid clay.
The acidic soil has been improved by the addition of humus (sheet mulched beds with worms underneath).History of The Site: The original site has been occupied for over 100 years.
It was a ‘dry rainforest’, visited  seasonally by the nomadic Dharawal people who would not camp on the mountain.Our Permaculture site has been in implementation since mid 1993. we started when the drought broke and our seedlings were old enough to plant out.
Most of the upper garden beds are the zone 1 and 2 mixed herbs and vegies under orchard trees.
These garden beds were made using Esther Dean’s no-dig method without soil (to combat Kikuyu an invasive grass and to improve soil structure).
By the 10th anniversary of the site the trees were mature enough to survive the next drought without any hand watering.Once we had implemented half our original plan the system had evolved to show more potential and new challenges.
Shade and food was created in just 2 years which gave us quick rewards.
The new shape of the house formed a nurturing windbreak and suntrap and immediately the Mangos were able to hold their fruit better.The existing mature canopy species of this site included: winter citrus and summer prunus fruits, a large ornamental Palm, (existing) Sycamore and Pines, Red Cedar, Grevillia Robusta (to be removed as fuel), and Kurrangong.
The saplings In the layer below now include Mulberry (now 5 different varieties) which we use for fruit and silkworms, Bananas (various varieties).
Birch, Blackbean, Davidson Plum, Eugenia, Gingko, Tamarillo, Maple, Mango, Coffee, Avocado, Jackfruit, Wax Jumbu, Finger Lime, Olive, Tamarillo, Tamarind, Carob, Canistel, Pomegranate, Jaboticaba, Persimmon, Lilly Pilly, Malaysian Apple, Custard Apple, Guava, Native Rosella, Paperbarks, Fejoa, Lychee, Quince, various Figs, Longan, Babaco, Irish Strawberry Tree, Ice-Cream Bean, Jak Fruit, Bunya nut, Apple, Chestnut, Macadamia, Green Sapote and Mulberry.Shrubs include Hibiscus (edible flowers), Tea trees, Camellia sinensis (Tea), Lemon verbena, Lemon and Aniseed Myrtle, wormwood, various Sages, lavender, hazelnut, native raspberry, lychee, Jabuticaba.
Understorey plants include: loganberry, strawberry, raspberry, blueberry, arrowroot, taro, Yacon, clumping Bamboo, sugarcane, Monstera, and mixed salad greens.
Living Mulch plants include: warrigal greens and sweet potato.
Water Plants include: taro, watercress, kang kung, water chestnuts, lotus.
Climbers include Passionfruit, Kiwifruit, and Epiphiliums (Dragon Fruit), different varieties of grape, and choko.
There are some mature trees that will be succeeded by edible species.
The wood is used wood turners, as garden edging or as fuel in our wood-stove uses their timber.
The most prolific food plants are: chilli, tomato, mulberry, sweet potato and grapes.Our Special Interests: In the early years there was a strong emphasis on rare and heritage non-hybrid breeds.
Fruit fly requires yeast baits and the chickens to eat infected fruit.
After years of struggle to combat fruit fly, Bill Mollison suggested that we “simply grow what fruit fly don’t eat” and that works for us.
Liquid manure in made in big recycled drums and it converts the most invasive weeds such as Madeira vine into liquid manure.Old chickens are welcomed on our site to let them retire gracefully.
We have some recent problems with Deer eating young trees so we now protect the young trees with wire, solar powered electric fencing and covers of stinging nettle and Lantana off-cuts.
Beautiful birds often eat our fruit but we have plenty to spare.There has been on-going tree planting of endemic species and additional introduced edibles.
Most weeks we would start new beds, each day we could collect food.
Now, we rarely plant new plants, sometimes we might start some new seed in pots and every day we can find something to eat in the garden.
Often other people share with us in return.
They were not given the ideal micro-climate and the soil was probably inhospitable.
But many plants did including the rare tropical and bush-tucker plants.After 25 years the soil was finally black and friable.
The garden beds had risen with organic matter.
The edges on the gardens needed to be fortified and there were new plantings of shade-tolerant plants.
We were pleased to learn that a lot of bush-tucker plants like shade.
These plants helped to fill the understory.Our definition of a weed is a plant that “does not respect diversity”.
These weeds include Madeira Vine (which can collapse whole areas of rainforest), coral trees, Kikuyu and turkey rhubarb, lantana, croften weed and non-native wandering jew (white flowered).Fleshy invasive plants such as Madeira vine and grass are controlled well by chickens.Paul has noticed that lantana keeps Madeira vine out.
Woody weeds such as Lantana are manually removed and replaced by shrubs to keep soil and wildlife protected.
Invasive trees such as Privet and Indian Coral tree have strangler figs in them, have been ring-barked, lopped and the branches piled up off the ground.
Weeds work well to mine minerals so we keep our mineral on site.
We have found various uses for invasive plants.
Fleshy plants are put into the poultry house – nothing survives in there!
Some cheap steel bins need to be stored under cover to reduce possibility of rust.Solar hot water is piped through radiators to warm the house in the shoulder seasons.
excess hot water could be used in an adsorption system for air conditioning.Even though we are solar challenged, we get enough sun to cook on sunny days, the temperature in the oven gets up to 115 which makes the best porridge, Curry and Italian sauces.
We bought it years ago from Rainbow Power.We have more than 17 varieties of mulberry trees.
So, now we call our site SILK FARM.The regular work involves animal care, mulching, planting, cuttings, grafting, seed management, harvesting.
Most of the site management is done by April Sampson-Kelly, sometimes by Paul and Ryan and occasional student workers.
There is little heavy work as the garden is designed to be worked by less-able and small persons.
Enjoy on-site training and short courses here through Permaculture Wollongong Institute.
Permaculture VisionsPermaculture Training Online PioneersEdible flowers: Sage: pineapple and fruit salad sage (our favourites), Pumpkin (Curcurbits), Sunflower (flowerhead can be baked whole), Magnolia, Artichokes, Elderflowers (this needs frost for good scent), Bluebells, Calendulas, Cornflowers, Hibiscus, pelagoniums, Garland, Nasturtiums, Chrysanthemums (medicinal), Citrus flowers, Brassica flowers (such as brocolli and turnip flowers), Borage, Amaranthus, Violets, Fushia, Gladioli, Banana (cooked after treated by soaking).
Maidera vine is feed to the poultry and seed is placed in areas of infestation to encourage the chickens to scratch and disturb young tubers.Edible Groundcovers: Yarrow (medicinal), Chamomile (medicinal tea), strawberries, New Zealand Spinach, mint, woodruff (flavouring), prostrate grevillia (nectar for cordial), Marjoram.Shrubs: Blueberries, Hazelnut, Tamarillo, Coffee, Tea, Native Raspberries (pictured).
.Tall grasses, herbs and canes: Blueberries, raspberries, Taro, Beans, Peas, Monstera, Spinach, Milo (type of Sorghum), Popping Sorghum, Corn, Wheat, Rye, wormwood, perenial Capsicum, Bush Tomatoes, Sage, Oregano, Sugarcane, Banana.Vines:  passionfruit (sweet and banana), Kiwifruit (1 male, 2 female), Basella, varieties of grape.Trees: Blue Lilly pilly, Pigeon Pea – soil conditioner edible fruit, Indigenous, and edible pods windbreak, birds.
Moreton Bay fig, Sandpaper Banana – fruits fig, Bunya pine (huge tree with large and dangerous fruits up to 35kg each, do not plant near homes or paths), Monstera Deliociosa – (many Australians call this Monsterio), Chestnut Avocado – easily grown from seed, Walnut, Lemon – grow from seed, Chinotto Orange, Native or introducd Hibiscus (flowers) – seed or cutting, Mango, Olives, Macadamia, Illawarra Plum, Mountain Paw Paw, Damson (Babaco, also known as champagne fruit), Pistachio, Hazelnut, Almond, Saba Nut, Pecan (need male and female), Pear, Rambutan, Grapefruit, Native Guava, Persimmon, Orange (including Seville and Valencia orange), Mandarin (try to obtain early, middle and late varities), Barbados Cherry, Feijoa, Ice Cream Bean, Apple.Smaller harvest from these below- Arbutus unedo – Irish strawberry tree, Jak fruit, Japanese Raisan Tree, Linden, Gingko Lemonade, Italian Pine, Medlar, Stone Pine, Natal Cherry,  Custard Apple, Annona Cherimoya, Nashi, Wine Palm, Lychee, Walking stick Palm, Cabbage Tree Palm (indigenous), Pomelo, Carob (in a dry micro-climate), Silver Birch (edible syrup), Pomegrante, Sugar Maple.Fruit Fly prone trees [Must be planted within chicken forage areas] Quince, Plum,  Paw Paw – papaya, apricot, Peach, Loquat, Nectarine.Useful Trees (all indigenous species support beneficial micro-organisms)All trees contribute to wind channellingIllawarra Flame (indigenous) flowers, birds, native bees, mulch, windbreak, deep rooted.
Red Cedar (Toona Australis) rare indigenous tree, suited to wetter zone, deciduous, good windbreak.
Boobialla (soft edible fruit) bird attractant, bushy, windbreak and screen.
Acacia is main winter forage for bees, good pioneer species, soil conditioning and kindling for wood fire.
It was founded in 2000 by a group of local people concerned by the serious environmental, social and cultural problems affecting the nation.
They established an ecological education center to promote permaculture techniques, local biodiversity conservation, production of organic food, and a seed bank that strives to reconstruct the Mayan seed heritage.MISSIONIMAP develops the practical skills and awareness needed to ensure food sovereignty, community development and the preservation of biodiversity and ancestral knowledge.VISIONPeople enjoying good quality of life and well-being as a result of permaculture education and ancestral Mayan knowledge, having reached food sovereignty, and thriving as self-sustaining communities safeguarding their native seeds and their local ecosystems.We implement our mission and vision through community service, workshops, certified permaculture courses, tours, group trips, school trips and consultancies.
IMAP’S FOCUSMany of the issues farmers face can be overcome with simple, inexpensive solutions.
The key is to listen to what local people did before modern agriculture, and see how new techniques can complement traditional ways without sweeping them aside.
But smallholder farming is more than backbreaking.
Farmers disproportionately bear the impact of climate change – they are particularly vulnerable because any disruption to their agricultural system resulting from extreme weather events like hurricanes, extreme rainfall or drought results in significant crop and income losses and exacerbates food insecurity.Few farmers have adjusted their farming strategies to cope with climate change, due to limited resources and capacity.IMAP implements permaculture education and ancestral knowledge through three pathways:1.
FOOD SOVEREIGNTYIMAP seeks to:We also welcome people from all over the world, who come to IMAP in pursuit of practical ways to live a simple, intentional life.
IMAP’s goal is for people from all walks of life to apply what they learn to their homes, their cultures, their lives – and, in so doing, to collectively create an abundant future for all.2.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENTIMAP’S goal is to increase access to permaculture education, resources and appropriate technology, so that individuals and communities can meet their own basic needs in terms of housing, clean water and waste management.3.
BIODIVERSITYBoth permaculture and ancestral knowledge recognize the need for a harmonious coexistence with our environment in order to ensure our survival, and the survival of all other species on this planet.IMAP promotes native seeds and the conservation of local ecosystems because of their genetic value, their cultural importance and their potential for enhancing quality of life and well-being.
LEARN MORE ABOUT IMAPFEATURED ARTICLENATIVE SON, NATIVE SEEDSBy Kelly Engebreston, University of St. ThomasIn the small Guatemalan town of San Lucas Toliman, among a lush patchwork of banana plants and avocado trees where roosters and ducks roam tunefully, Ronaldo “Rony” Lec Ajcot runs IMAP, the Institute of Mesoamerican Permaculture.
VIDEOS ABOUT IMAP A PERMACULTURIST AT HOMEJoin IMAP's Coordinator in a tour of the permaculture gardens around his home in San Lucas Toliman, Guatemala.WE ARE ONLY ONE PART OF THE CREATIONIMAP's Coordinator, Rony Lec, speaks of humanity's role from a Mayan perspective  : we are here to keep life.
To make life.
To provide life.
To be life.
And to realize that our dependance on nature is vastly important.A BEEKEEPER SPEAKSHear how permaculture changed this smallholder farmer's life.
SEEDS ARE THE ANSWEROn a daily basis, most of us don't think about where our food comes from.
Seeds hold more than the next harvest - they hold our entire future.IMAP'S WORKIn today's world, why is it at all relevant to draw on ancestral knowledge?
IMAP is located on the shores of one of the most beautiful lakes in the world.
The stunning Lake Atitlan is in the core of Guatemala and offers a pristine landscape surrounded by a chain of volcanoes and warm-hearted Mayan communities.
Immersed in lush greenery, IMAP has such a calming and natural energy that you feel re-grounded as soon as you arrive.
Volcanoes, massive trees, lake Atitlan and the altitude of 1,500 meters combine to create a landscape that can only be described as magical.The trees have a bright green foliage, and spread out high and wide.
In every direction you see green and splashes of colour, dripping with natural opulence.The effect is nothing short of uplifting.
It’s that deep breath you take when you get there, the way your shoulders slouch in relaxation, the instant smile that appears on your face as you enter this biodiversity paradise.ReconnectMuch love goes into the way we design our gardens and accommodations so that visitors feel re-connected to the Earth as soon as they arrive and much after they leave.
The buildings at IMAP are harmoniously integrated into the surrounding ecosystem and make the most of locally available materials.Along the winding paths you will find permaculture in action: home gardens, herb spirals, medicinal gardens, composting toilets, tree nurseries, solar ovens and fish ponds holistically designed as part of the surrounding environment.Ecological HousingWe offer on-site ecologically built bungalows for volunteers or groups, snuggled among lush permaculture gardens and fruit trees, overlooking the majestic Lake Atitlan.
IMAP’s educational center is located in the community of Pachitulul, on the south edge of Lake Atitlán between San Lucas Tolimán and Santiago Atitlán.You can get here by going to Panajachel and then taking a boat to Santiago and a pickup to IMAP.
Rony Lec – CoordinatorRony is one of the world’s leading experts in permaculture and Mayan ancestral knowledge.
Rony has spent the last 20 years teaching and implementing permaculture throughout Central, South and North America focusing on promoting food sovereignty and preserving biodiversity for the survival of Indigenous communities.
Through his extensive work with Indigenous communities on traditional ecological knowledge, seed saving, native plants, local/global food movements, livelihood security, and the interaction between communities and the environment, he has made a key contribution to the empowerment of Indigenous people around the world.
Gregorio Ajcot – Educational FacilitatorGregorio has worked in the area of permaculture and sustainable agriculture for 15 years.
He specializes in hands-on educational practices that draw from his extensive experience and deep knowledge of native varieties, seed saving, and soil conservation techniques.
And he can whip up a garden for anyone, anywhere, using whatever resources are at hand.
Ramiro not only understands the intrinsic links between people, land, and the cosmos, but also how they apply to agriculture.
He brings 15 years experience to his work, and specializes in farmer-to-farmer methodology and crop diversification using native plants for food production.
He monitors seed sales, coordinates with farmers, and ensures quality control and promotion of native seeds.
After working alongside local people and learning about their struggles and joys, you won't return home the same person - you can count on it.
Get inspired to begin your own journey for greater impact on the shores of the stunning Lake Atitlán, in the heart of Mayan culture.IMAP provides an alternative to hotel chains and tour buses, for travelers looking for a more authentic experience - in a nutshell, you will engage with your environment, and with the people who live there.Your group will :•     create real connections with local people•     implement lasting permaculture practices•     participate in hands-on work with a farmer or family, and•     immerse yourself in the rich and textured Mayan culture.By planting trees, you will empower a family to 1) produce fruit,  2) generate income by selling the fruit in the local market and 3) conserve the local ecosystem.Design and build a home garden in a relocated community, in a way that can be carried on and replicated by the community members themselves in the years to come.
Alongside school children, you will build a garden in a local school in order to improve food sovereignty and combat malnutritionOur Group Trips last 7 days/6 nights, but the length of stay is negotiable.
They are perfect for meaningful holidays, career breaks, eco-travel, alternative missionary work, or just people seeking to do something beneficial.
Would you like to proceed to legacy Twitter?YesA single source on gardening, farming, homesteading, and self-sufficiency using Permaculture principles designed for temperate climates.Are you sure you want to view these Tweets?
Viewing Tweets won't unblock @TCPermacultureWhy I won't be teaching a PDC Course... well, not for a long time.http://tcpermaculture.com/site/2015/10/26/why-i-will-not-teach-a-pdc-course-well-not-for-a-long-time/ …A Bauernhof Kitsteiner Update!http://tcpermaculture.com/site/2015/09/23/a-bauernhof-kitsteiner-update/ …Permaculture Projects: Chicken Brooder!http://tcpermaculture.com/site/2015/09/05/permaculture-projects-a-moderately-large-chicken-brooder/ …Why I Love Hunting Mushrooms!http://tcpermaculture.com/site/2015/07/21/why-i-love-hunting-mushrooms/ …Eggless Elderberry Flower Fritters!http://tcpermaculture.com/site/2015/06/04/eggless-elderberry-flower-fritters/ …Course: Greg Judy's Risk Free Ranching - Starting From ScratchOnly 28 days left for early-bird discounted pricing!http://tcpermaculture.com/site/course-risk-free-ranching-starting-from-scratch-2-day-course/ …Vlog (video log) of Our Life at Bauernhof Kitsteiner!http://tcpermaculture.com/site/videos/ Permaculture Plants: Mulberry!http://tcpermaculture.com/site/2015/06/02/permaculture-plants-mulberries/ …An Introduction to Keyline.http://tcpermaculture.com/site/2015/05/04/an-introduction-to-keyline/ …Throw Your Hat Over the Fence!A story that strongly influenced my life.http://tcpermaculture.com/site/2015/04/30/throw-your-hat-over-the-fence/ …Permaculture Plants: Muscadines!http://tcpermaculture.com/site/2015/04/28/permaculture-plants-muscadines/ …COURSE: Risk Free Ranching – Starting From Scratch (2 Day Course)http://tcpermaculture.com/site/course-risk-free-ranching-starting-from-scratch-2-day-course/ …Permaculture Plants: Currantshttp://tcpermaculture.com/site/2015/03/23/permaculture-plants-currants/ …Designing A Custom Native Plant Listhttp://tcpermaculture.com/site/2015/02/20/designing-a-custom-native-plant-list/ …The Facts Behind Dynamic Accumulatorshttp://tcpermaculture.com/site/2015/01/07/the-facts-behind-dynamic-accumulators/ …Bruce Lee would be a Permaculturisthttp://tcpermaculture.com/site/2014/12/18/bruce-lee-would-be-a-permaculturist/ …Permaculture Plants: Ginsenghttp://tcpermaculture.com/site/2014/12/12/permaculture-plants-ginseng/ …December 2013 Farm Updatehttp://tcpermaculture.com/site/2014/12/08/december-2014-farm-update-and-photos-from-an-iphone/ …We Bought the Farm!http://tcpermaculture.com/site/2014/11/24/we-bought-the-farm/ …Beyond the Chicken… Alternative Poultry Optionshttp://tcpermaculture.com/site/2014/11/06/beyond-the-chicken-alternative-poultry-options/ …          @TCPermaculture hasn't Tweeted yet.
Copy it to easily share with friends.Add this Tweet to your website by copying the code below.
Learn moreAdd this video to your website by copying the code below.
Try again?By embedding Twitter content in your website or app, you are agreeing to the Twitter Developer Agreement and Developer Policy.This timeline is where you’ll spend most of your time, getting instant updates about what matters to you.
Get instant insight into what people are talking about now.
FacebookTwitterWe occasionally find a volunteer squash or melon on the farm.
“Volunteer” meaning we […]We occasionally find a volunteer squash or melon on the farm.
[…]I have finally gotten around to putting together a list of the products we […]I have finally gotten around to putting together a list of the products we […] I have been following this site for ages and have passed it on to friends at our allotments.
It gives you the capability to share via e-mail, social media, etc., from any Web site.Wow, John.
Great site!
I’m looking forward to your input during Geoff Lawton’s PDC!Hey John,Nice site!
Looking forward to working with you in Geoffs PDC course.best,Tim ONeillI am just getting started with permaculture and so far this is the site I come back to over and over to find the information I am looking for.
Glad to have you here!John , you want my opinion about farming and permaculture , well I give up city life , and the only life I knew ,and live now away from family and friends  , and the life that I used to , to achieve something in my farm clean and good .
I know people talk behind my back , but sure I feel  I am that close to prove them wrong , that there are ways different from the ways they know and believe in , that nature provided man with food and stuff in organic natural ways different from they know now ,for thousand of years .
I noticed throughout the class that many people were worried about not knowing the scientific name of plants, or common names for that matter, and would continually have to ask the teacher what plant it was.
I need to use my brain cells, time and energy on helping others and helping the planet.
Do you know how time consuming, energy consuming, patience consuming, that is?
On another note, thank youuuu John for such an amazing site.
And thanks to your site, I can learn before my certification courses.
Again, many thanks for your website.This is a reply to the PDC owner who insisted on the use of common names for plants.
Common names in english are a nightmare for the foreign reader, please keep using the latin names.Greetings John, I love the work you have done and shared on this amazing site.
Your site is a great resource that I find myself coming back to again and again as there are things I wouldn’t have known about otherwise – mostly when it comes to species selection for temperate climes.
Being on Manitoulin Island, Ontario, Canada, I find myself struggling to figure out how to work with dolostone bedrock that is below the shallow soils – if not exposed as alvars – in trying to manage water (it tends toward being a flood and drought environment here) as well as watering livestock on such land.
Thus far I’ve only found that Dew Ponds may be the way to go for watering livestock.
Permaculture is so much fun, so this site is a blast for me!As far as your soils go… this is a tough one, but not insurmountable.
I do know that Jack Spirko (with TheSurvivalPodcast.com) has a similar issue in Texas – very shallow soils with bedrock underneath.
I am pretty sure he is going to have Geoff Lawton do a workshop at his place to deal with the land issues.
Hope this helps!I watched Jack Spirko’s videos, which were great, but they still had some soil to dig down into to make a hugel-swale type approach.
I suspect the Hugelkultur surrounded by a very thick layer of mulch in itself would work wonders but could it stand by itself as a contoured water catchment system?
While we did raised beds for the Zone 1 garden that technique is not practical for large fields and spaces.In those spaces we’re going to experiment with wood core beds with any soil and heavy mulch we can find on top, plus heavy seeding with a variety of tough cover crops.Even if the beds erode away a bit it isn’t a wasted effort because some will take and soil will build.
In his books Joel Salatin speaks of exposed rock all over their farm years ago that is now heavy topsoil.Hang in there!Thanks Gordon.
I’ve since found and developed a number of methods for working with shallow soil and bedrock.
Thanks again ^_^i am italian but live in taipei (taiwan)i was a farmer and i am trying to make a little garden and growing vegetable at 6th floor of this bad skyscraperhappy to see that i am not aloneI consider this site to be a great resource.
Walnut is such an awesome tree and its helpful to know how you can fit it into your landscape.
There is not as much information on Temperate Permaculture as their should be.Hi John,I think you might be interested in this interview with Joel Salatin.https://www.startmeeting.com/wall/recorded_audio?audioRecordingUrl=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.startmeeting.com%2Fr%2FHN7CJ%252FjjlnU&subscriptionId=988552 He talks about the advantages of not owning land and how you can make it work.
Thanks for sharing!-JohnHey John,looks like a great website!
Smooth looking.Thanks!Dear John,What is the country and state/region/province/ in which you farm?Gratefully,TerryLove your website, lot’s of helpful info.
I know how important permaculture is and why we need to do it, but too many websites lacking  practical info on doing IT.
jeffThanks for this site.
There is so much useful information packed into this site.
i have seen this image for years but never come across the location.The tree in beginning advertising is a live oak down south somewhere, possibly North Carolina, possibly South Carolina but I don’t see much spanish moss so mane more north…I believe it’s a state champI believe its the Angel Oak Tree on John’s Island, SC.
It is a Live Oak (Quercus Virginiana)….. Definitely a beautiful tree….Btw, Nice site, where are you based out of?Braden – currently we are in the Azores, a small group of islands in the North Atlantic.
I will be moving to Tennessee in the Summer of 2014.Just discovered your site and looking forward to getting in to the information you have.
My wife and I have just purchased 20 acres in central KY and are very much looking forward to moving to the land in 2014.
Permaculture is the way we want to go but I have to admit I am concerned about making it work so that we have our own food production without having to resort to tearing up the beautiful land.
This will give you the confidence to design a sustainable system that works with nature instead of destroying it.
People have been doing this, and are doing this, all over the world.
It takes design.Thanks for the tip John.
I think the correct site is http://www.geofflawton.com.
I came across your site while researching ground covers for my first live project, and this looks like a wonderful resource that I will come back to many times.
So far I have found lots of online ‘guides’, but only limited sources of seeds, and those for normal garden varieties rather than bulk legumes for ground cover for new swales.Thanks!I have no bulk sources to recommend as of yet.
I did a quick search for cowpea and got this one: http://www.turnerseed.com/site/SpringFallSeed.asp which has both cowpea and hairy vetch.Also, I did a search for lupine and got this one: http://www.edenbrothers.com/store/lupine_seeds.htmlI can’t say anything good or bad about these sources, but that is how I would locate suppliers.
Our pack Llamas provide the fertilizer for our garden, We used to sell the pulverized dung by the garbage can.
Having researched some plants that will grow in our poor soil under awful climate conditions, Sea Buckthorn is what we will plant.
A chipper turned the weed trees into mulch for the orchard.
In the fall the pallets were moved to the garden, the pigs plowed and fertilized that too.
We get old fruit and veggies with some dairy from our 2 small grocery stores.
Building a Star Dome with 3′ chord wood wall for our year round greenhouse, will be heated with Rocket Stove.Our wood fired cedar soaking tub is being shipped from Vancouver Island today.
We also have a composting toilet, keeping our water table clean and saving $30,000 on septic system.
Off the grid and loving it.Thank you for being sogiving with your research and passion.I have been a horticulturist in Southern Califonrina for 30 years and stumbled opon your site.
Permaculture is a new name for a pratical way to grow food, I am so happy that more people are interested in growing their own food and give backto the earth-soil.Please add me to your suscribe list.Thank youKatarinaA little off topic but very important to us.
Thanks.http://www.change.org/petitions/loews-corporation-and-loews-hotels-stop-the-bluegrass-pipeline?recruiter=80081720&utm_campaign=signature_receipt&utm_medium=email&utm_source=share_petitioncheck out our campaign.
http://www.indiegogo.com/projects/cloud-9-animal-sanctuary-at-juniper-ridge-farm-new-barn/x/6501891Well John I am totally impressed with your site.
I have been an accredited designer since 1990 but mostly my focus has been on restoring degraded landscapes – now starting on my fourth, a high altitude cold climate desert, possibly my greatest challenge yet given the effect of higher temperatures and increased CO2 on the plant kingdom.
Since have developed a 10 acre site in SW Ohio.
Recently purchased 21 additional acres to expand the local foods base.
Am searching for info on how plants are responding to climate change and which plants are likely candidates for the near future based on tolerance to heat, drought, flood, sudden cold snaps, etc.
Searched for info on mayhaw and your site came up.
Our farm is on Facebook as Wrocklage Run Farm if anyone is interested.Thank you so much for this wonderful website.
It has been a continuous recourse and  wealth of information as I start in my first year of trying to build my edible landscape in my extremely vertical yard, and back woods in the mountains of western NC.love the site, great and inspiring info!
check this out for young minds or parents; http://www.insectlore.com/butterfly-garden/Hi John, I have been following your site since the beginning of the year, after I heard your interview on permaculture voices, and have really learned a lot from you.
I thought it tied in wonderfully to the concepts you’ve discussed about community, and your plans for an intentional community.
Thanks for the kind words!JohnGlad to find your Temperate Climate Permaculture site.
So, we’re re-building that soil by planting lots of daikon radishes, & also by digging up & hauling sods from the back of our lot to the front.
Otherwise we’re planting fruit trees, & will soon have chickens.Have you anything on the oil sands in Northern Albertahi how do I print photos and info from this siteHi John,  When I saw your post “We bought the farm” it struck a chord with me as we were recently in the process of trying to do the same thing but it did not materialize as we could not agree on price.
We are in northwest Ohio and have a farming background but I have been a plumber for the past 25 years, while gardening and raising chickens on our 3 acre property.We as a family have leaned towards the self sufficient life style for a long time but it wasn’t until this opportunity to possibly buy an organic farm that we really got fired up about it.
For now we will concentrate on learning as much as we can about it and hopefully be able to turn the small properties we now own into one of the sustainable food producing ecosystems we read about.I have been wondering what I can focus on, in life after plumbing, and now I believe I have found the answer in permaculture, at least as far as applying the principles to our families lifestyle.
Listening to Joel Salatin, Geoff Lawton and others, it makes so much good sense and I want to be a part of the solution to some of our societies problems rather than contributing to them.We would like to come up with a permaculture design for our 3 acre property.
Do you think it is necessary to do an entire design course before attempting to produce a plan for one’s property.
I’ll be interested in following your new farm adventure too.Thanks, MarkMark – I would highly recommend taking a Permaculture Design Certificate Course.
The PDC should give you some great tools for how to think about designing your place.
I do not think it is mandatory, but it is highly recommended.Welcome to the amazing world of Permaculture!Johnwell, I seem to come across this site while researching about tapping of pine trees to collect resins and this site has provide me with very useful information and very helpfulHello John: Thank you for discussing your methodology and list of resources to create a Native Plant list!
I found it helpful, even after 40 years of desert gardening.
Interestingly, and this was not part of our consideration, but eastern Tennessee is one of the few locations in the US that is having the least climate shifts.http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/images/science/USPrecipMaps-large.jpgThanks for the comment!JohnI want to thank you for sharing your research on Tennessee plants.
Nurse job thing, so the short cut is well appreciated since I live in TN also!Great website,Hi John,I was wondering if you have come across any good information sites on cold climate chinampas?
I have a large scale application on an Island in a  river near Riga…It would take interest from a large not informed permaculture community….I am presently taking a Geoff Lawton design course…but we haven’t got to far along with aquaculture…..Dear Sir,Thank you for e-mail please note I am interestd in red Ganoderma spawnCan you provideThanking youAnwer zaibpermaculture is a great method to improve soil quality, instead improve productivity by using natural resources and appropriate technology, this is the way to help farmer to reduce their cost and make agricultural production sustain.So very good to see a critical scientific mind in the field of permaculture.I’m glad to have stumbled across your Phytoaccumulator article (thought it left me hanging), and am looking forward to discovering much more through your writings and knowledge.There is so much beauty in this world and being a shutin your site brings me such warmth and beauty.
We have not done any courses yet, but are off to Santa Maria to see some property to get started on a better lifestyle.Do you have any reservation about PC in Azores.
Your opinion would be cherished.Great site, great information and great generosity of spirit!
We are just about to move into our 2 acre small(very)holding in NE Bulgaria and I hope to apply many permaculture basics/methods/ethic in raising livestock and growing our food and fodder crops.
Your site is a valuable source of information.
Kind RegardsHarrisonHi John, thanks for the great work you’ve put in to create this amazing site!
My first worry would be, the thickness of the top soil – how soon we may expect to strike rock.
Any straw (or similar) on the islands that you know of?Thank you for all the informative articles and information.
Time for some labor on this Saturday.Great site.
I to understand the solution hunger/poverty  & three quater of the world can be answered by implementing permacultural principles .
Permaculture is the a balance of nature.its my pleasure to get aquaintenance.
Most the problems affecting enviromental issues and lack of food that leads to poverty is contributed by us  our communities or society on poor farming systems.
Therefore , we require more information on new technogies to improve soil texture, enviromental conservation.
I do understand the solution for hunger/poverty  & three quater of the world can be answered by implementing permacultural principles .
Permaculture is the a balance of nature.its my pleasure to get aquaintenance.
Most the problems affecting enviromental issues and lack of food that leads to poverty is contributed by us  our communities or society on poor farming systems.
Therefore , we require more information on new technogies to improve soil texture, enviromental conservation.
I need your support.What a great site you put together John.
Another to start another food forest on 5 acres and your plant index it just what I needed for my climate.
We will be delivering it in a community garden and wanted input as to the most inprtant topic to include in this course.
marlenLove this site!
Thank you for all the hard work you put in for us readersWonderful and informative site.Thanks a lot for your efforts.I enjoyed your post about the effect of the chicken coop on the grass.
I also liked the plant identification, I often don’t get around to identify some common plants I see around and it was fun to see that even someone like you, with a lot of expertise, does the same “footwork” for knowledge!Excellent source of information, try to follow them all.
Hope to get some land around Tellico Plains, TN next year and apply this information.
I live in a very cold area, zone 4a and only have a 90-100 frost free growing season.Thank you for a great resource.
We are out of the country during your permaculture course however I would love to take the class in the future.Thanks for your work toward educating people about sustainable and regenerative farming practices.
I hope to learn a lot from your site!Love your site!
Many people who are new to small-scale organic farming come in with a lot of expectations and assumptions on how things are going to be.
The romantic idea of living off the land and farming within a sustainable community has lured them closer to taking action and getting something going, whether it be a small farm, an off-grid homestead or perhaps just an ambitious garden.
A lot of these folks have been inspired by the Permaculture movement, read the books of Bill Mollison, watched YouTube videos with Geoff Lawton and dreamed up enough ideas about herb spirals and forest gardens to make your head spin.
I was exactly one of those people when I started my farm, I was inspired by Mollison and Lawton immensely and the idea of a self-sustaining farm was my dream and I was going to make it a reality, no matter the cost.
It didn’t all pan out that way, because even in my first year of farming, I got smacked in the face with a hard dose of reality and many of the promises of Permaculture simply didn’t work at all or were so impractical that they were nearly impossible to implement on a commercial scale, even on a small farm like mine (.25 acres).
Many people take these slogans at face value and I see a lot of farmers and homesteaders burning out as a result because they were promised something that didn’t deliver.
It’s great to showcase successful models and inspire people to start farming themselves, but I think it’s just as important to properly set up expectations and always explain things from a contextual framework, which is something many permaculture instructors don’t do.
Having said that, there are many that do as well, so I’m in no way going after individual permaculture teachers, I’m going after five of the ideas that I see as falsehoods.I’d like to start with some definitions of terms that are going to be helpful to understand if this article is going to be effective.Permaculture has become quite a nebulous term in that many people define it in different ways.
Mollison’s main criticism of conventional annual based agriculture was that it was not sustainable because nothing about it was permanent.
Because of mass soil cultivation and petrochemicals used in conventional agriculture, topsoil is continuously mined away and biodiversity loss.
It is also commonly referred to a design system based on observing patterns in nature.I use the term context to illustrate that your experience with something might not be the same as someone else’s.
For example, you live on a farm in a high and dry arid climate, therefore creating swales to hold moisture might make sense for your context, but it doesn’t for someone living in a wet and low elevation climate.
It’s the lens through which we view the world and solutions are tools in a toolkit.I would also like to recognize what Permaculture got right.
First, using the idea as a design method based in observation of natural systems is a great way in which to approach working with anything.
On a basic principles level, monocultures don’t exist anywhere in nature.
If they had said, these were only solutions for a home scale garden, we probably wouldn’t be having this discussion.
A forest garden is a fantastic idea in principle.
The basic premise is that you can establish a food production system based on the natural ecology of a forest.
You take the time to establish the system and once it’s set up, it will produce food consistently and you’ll get to walk around like Adam and Eve and just pick and eat without doing much work.
There are many reasons for that, but the primary reason is that agriculture does not exist in nature.
As much as we’d like it to reflect aspects of nature, it can only to a small degree, because in order for a food system to be dependable, it needs to produce predictable yields on a consistent basis otherwise it can’t scale.
In order to deliver those results, trees need to be pruned, annuals reseeded and crops harvested.
In a forest garden, where most of the crops are perennial and scattered around much like they would be in a forest, it’s very difficult to streamline production systems in regards to harvesting and planting.
Now, if we’re talking about establishing a forest garden for your property and it’s more about the lifestyle, that is something entirely different and that’s perfectly fine as far as I’m concerned.
Most people I talk to understand this when we clearly define the context of the forest garden, but there is so much idealism about it, that many people think that this idea can be applied to a larger scale agricultural system.
There are people out there like Mark Shepard trying to make the model work, but from what I can see, there’s not lot of production coming off those farms.
In fact, the parts I see as being the most productive are the annual vegetable row crops they have interplanted amongst the trees, which makes sense.
The reason this myth can hurt people is that it puts the idea in their head that a farm is going to take care of itself and that is the furthest thing from the truth.
This has been reiterated by the likes of Mark Shepard and Toby Hemenway (RIP), two people who I have great respect for, but I would say to that, compared to what and when?
Sure, annual vegetables are more work in that they produce far more food and more consistently, so that is somewhat self-evident.
Agriculture is now more productive on less land and with less people working than ever in recorded history.
This is not to say that farming should not be made easier and it’s why farmers should be continuously focused on working smart than working hard.The Lazy Gardener idea was perpetuated by Mollison in his early work and it sort of ties into the forest garden, in that you can plant some things and forget about them.
I’m not saying don’t be a lazy gardener, but if you’re going to be lazy, adjust your expectations.
Whenever I visit a farm or homestead of someone who has been inspired by the lazy gardening method, I see a lot of weeds and not a lot of production.
If your context is to be a lazy gardener and you don’t want to put in a lot of work, fine, but don’t expect to make a significant contribution to the food system or let alone, make a good living from it.There are many different forms of mulch, but the most commonly known in permaculture is straw mulch.
Maybe it’s a context thing, but in my experience, straw mulch is the most impractical mulch to use on a garden or a farm.
It suppresses weeds, contains soil moisture, prevents soil erosion and can keep soil cool in hot weather.
Another problem that is often overlooked with mulch is that it keeps the soil cool.
That might be great in the summer, but it sucks at the beginning of the season when you want to warm the soil to expedite your crops.
I’ve seen so many farmers figure this out the hard way, where they had spent years mulching their farms just to peel it all off years later.
There are far more practical ways to incorporate mulch onto a farm.
By using bio-intensive style planting densities, once a crop is 50–75% mature, it grows a canopy of foliage that will cover the soil and function as a weed suppressant, soil canopy to prevent erosion and baking in the sun.
My favourite is landscape fabric, which can be reused for many years.
The biggest problem I see with the Mulch Everything myth is that many farmers spend a lot of time and money mulching everything, just to get rid of it later.
That’s a lot of wasted resources for a lot of people.Here are two examples on how small commercial farmers like myself are using mulch.Flail Mower to mulch bedsLandscape Fabric bedsA swale is a mound of earth that is made on contour with the natural grade of the land.
The idea is to create a depression on the hillside that will hold moisture and create what is known as a plume deep underneath the soil where water will build up.
I live in a high desert climate and I remember looking around at all the farms in the region, then asking myself why do all the orchards and vineyards here not do this?
It turns out, there are many reasons why you wouldn’t put swales on a farm.
Second, they interfere with the grid of your land, so that if you need to have things in rows or straight lines for production purposes, it makes that very difficult and inefficient.
Thirdly, not all crops and farms need that amount of water retention.
I’ve heard horror stories of permaculture consultants putting swales on land that shouldn’t have had them, now there are problems with too much water retention that has led to landslides.
A method of installing water retention into the landscape that is far more practical is to use a Key-line plow, which rips a deep cut into the land, but without the backhoe and the mess that creates.
It can also allow a farm to keep their traditional rows.
Many farms don’t need more water retention.
It all depends on the climate you’re in and the specific needs of your farm.Geoff Lawton discussing swalesThis is one slogan that I hear every workshop that I teach and I’m not exactly sure where it came from.
I might be like a game of Telephone where it’s been said here and there by so many people for so long, that the origin is totally lost.
The idea here is that by planting certain flowers and creating habitat for bugs, bees, and birds, you will have no pest problems on a farm.
It’s also one where I’ve seen people waste a lot of time pursuing with little to no results.
On any commercial farm, there are going to be pests.
If you think you can avoid pests on your farm by planting some beneficial flowers around, think again, you maybe in for a rude awakening.
Perhaps the most impressive farm I’ve seen that has used a somewhat permaculture approach to beneficial bugs, birds and plants is at La Ferme des Quatre-Temps in Hemmingford, Quebec.
But even then, I can’t say for sure if it’s working because they still use insect netting as their predominate pest protection strategy.Hedgerows as a form of integrated pest management at La Ferme des Quatre-TempsContext is everything when looking at sustainable solutions for agriculture.
It’s sort of ironic that many people within the Permaculture scene gravitate towards a singular cause or effect when critiquing agriculture or the world at large, because that in itself is a monoculture of thinking.
This is where I believe that some of the foundational principles within Permaculture need to be revisited.
theurbanfarmer.co @FarmerCStone
FacebookTwitterWe occasionally find a volunteer squash or melon on the farm.
“Volunteer” meaning we […]We occasionally find a volunteer squash or melon on the farm.
[…]I have finally gotten around to putting together a list of the products we […]I have finally gotten around to putting together a list of the products we […] I have been following this site for ages and have passed it on to friends at our allotments.
It gives you the capability to share via e-mail, social media, etc., from any Web site.Wow, John.
Great site!
I’m looking forward to your input during Geoff Lawton’s PDC!Hey John,Nice site!
Looking forward to working with you in Geoffs PDC course.best,Tim ONeillI am just getting started with permaculture and so far this is the site I come back to over and over to find the information I am looking for.
Glad to have you here!John , you want my opinion about farming and permaculture , well I give up city life , and the only life I knew ,and live now away from family and friends  , and the life that I used to , to achieve something in my farm clean and good .
I know people talk behind my back , but sure I feel  I am that close to prove them wrong , that there are ways different from the ways they know and believe in , that nature provided man with food and stuff in organic natural ways different from they know now ,for thousand of years .
I noticed throughout the class that many people were worried about not knowing the scientific name of plants, or common names for that matter, and would continually have to ask the teacher what plant it was.
I need to use my brain cells, time and energy on helping others and helping the planet.
Do you know how time consuming, energy consuming, patience consuming, that is?
On another note, thank youuuu John for such an amazing site.
And thanks to your site, I can learn before my certification courses.
Again, many thanks for your website.This is a reply to the PDC owner who insisted on the use of common names for plants.
Common names in english are a nightmare for the foreign reader, please keep using the latin names.Greetings John, I love the work you have done and shared on this amazing site.
Your site is a great resource that I find myself coming back to again and again as there are things I wouldn’t have known about otherwise – mostly when it comes to species selection for temperate climes.
Being on Manitoulin Island, Ontario, Canada, I find myself struggling to figure out how to work with dolostone bedrock that is below the shallow soils – if not exposed as alvars – in trying to manage water (it tends toward being a flood and drought environment here) as well as watering livestock on such land.
Thus far I’ve only found that Dew Ponds may be the way to go for watering livestock.
Permaculture is so much fun, so this site is a blast for me!As far as your soils go… this is a tough one, but not insurmountable.
I do know that Jack Spirko (with TheSurvivalPodcast.com) has a similar issue in Texas – very shallow soils with bedrock underneath.
I am pretty sure he is going to have Geoff Lawton do a workshop at his place to deal with the land issues.
Hope this helps!I watched Jack Spirko’s videos, which were great, but they still had some soil to dig down into to make a hugel-swale type approach.
I suspect the Hugelkultur surrounded by a very thick layer of mulch in itself would work wonders but could it stand by itself as a contoured water catchment system?
While we did raised beds for the Zone 1 garden that technique is not practical for large fields and spaces.In those spaces we’re going to experiment with wood core beds with any soil and heavy mulch we can find on top, plus heavy seeding with a variety of tough cover crops.Even if the beds erode away a bit it isn’t a wasted effort because some will take and soil will build.
In his books Joel Salatin speaks of exposed rock all over their farm years ago that is now heavy topsoil.Hang in there!Thanks Gordon.
I’ve since found and developed a number of methods for working with shallow soil and bedrock.
Thanks again ^_^i am italian but live in taipei (taiwan)i was a farmer and i am trying to make a little garden and growing vegetable at 6th floor of this bad skyscraperhappy to see that i am not aloneI consider this site to be a great resource.
Walnut is such an awesome tree and its helpful to know how you can fit it into your landscape.
There is not as much information on Temperate Permaculture as their should be.Hi John,I think you might be interested in this interview with Joel Salatin.https://www.startmeeting.com/wall/recorded_audio?audioRecordingUrl=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.startmeeting.com%2Fr%2FHN7CJ%252FjjlnU&subscriptionId=988552 He talks about the advantages of not owning land and how you can make it work.
Thanks for sharing!-JohnHey John,looks like a great website!
Smooth looking.Thanks!Dear John,What is the country and state/region/province/ in which you farm?Gratefully,TerryLove your website, lot’s of helpful info.
I know how important permaculture is and why we need to do it, but too many websites lacking  practical info on doing IT.
jeffThanks for this site.
There is so much useful information packed into this site.
i have seen this image for years but never come across the location.The tree in beginning advertising is a live oak down south somewhere, possibly North Carolina, possibly South Carolina but I don’t see much spanish moss so mane more north…I believe it’s a state champI believe its the Angel Oak Tree on John’s Island, SC.
It is a Live Oak (Quercus Virginiana)….. Definitely a beautiful tree….Btw, Nice site, where are you based out of?Braden – currently we are in the Azores, a small group of islands in the North Atlantic.
I will be moving to Tennessee in the Summer of 2014.Just discovered your site and looking forward to getting in to the information you have.
My wife and I have just purchased 20 acres in central KY and are very much looking forward to moving to the land in 2014.
Permaculture is the way we want to go but I have to admit I am concerned about making it work so that we have our own food production without having to resort to tearing up the beautiful land.
This will give you the confidence to design a sustainable system that works with nature instead of destroying it.
People have been doing this, and are doing this, all over the world.
It takes design.Thanks for the tip John.
I think the correct site is http://www.geofflawton.com.
I came across your site while researching ground covers for my first live project, and this looks like a wonderful resource that I will come back to many times.
So far I have found lots of online ‘guides’, but only limited sources of seeds, and those for normal garden varieties rather than bulk legumes for ground cover for new swales.Thanks!I have no bulk sources to recommend as of yet.
I did a quick search for cowpea and got this one: http://www.turnerseed.com/site/SpringFallSeed.asp which has both cowpea and hairy vetch.Also, I did a search for lupine and got this one: http://www.edenbrothers.com/store/lupine_seeds.htmlI can’t say anything good or bad about these sources, but that is how I would locate suppliers.
Our pack Llamas provide the fertilizer for our garden, We used to sell the pulverized dung by the garbage can.
Having researched some plants that will grow in our poor soil under awful climate conditions, Sea Buckthorn is what we will plant.
A chipper turned the weed trees into mulch for the orchard.
In the fall the pallets were moved to the garden, the pigs plowed and fertilized that too.
We get old fruit and veggies with some dairy from our 2 small grocery stores.
Building a Star Dome with 3′ chord wood wall for our year round greenhouse, will be heated with Rocket Stove.Our wood fired cedar soaking tub is being shipped from Vancouver Island today.
We also have a composting toilet, keeping our water table clean and saving $30,000 on septic system.
Off the grid and loving it.Thank you for being sogiving with your research and passion.I have been a horticulturist in Southern Califonrina for 30 years and stumbled opon your site.
Permaculture is a new name for a pratical way to grow food, I am so happy that more people are interested in growing their own food and give backto the earth-soil.Please add me to your suscribe list.Thank youKatarinaA little off topic but very important to us.
Thanks.http://www.change.org/petitions/loews-corporation-and-loews-hotels-stop-the-bluegrass-pipeline?recruiter=80081720&utm_campaign=signature_receipt&utm_medium=email&utm_source=share_petitioncheck out our campaign.
http://www.indiegogo.com/projects/cloud-9-animal-sanctuary-at-juniper-ridge-farm-new-barn/x/6501891Well John I am totally impressed with your site.
I have been an accredited designer since 1990 but mostly my focus has been on restoring degraded landscapes – now starting on my fourth, a high altitude cold climate desert, possibly my greatest challenge yet given the effect of higher temperatures and increased CO2 on the plant kingdom.
Since have developed a 10 acre site in SW Ohio.
Recently purchased 21 additional acres to expand the local foods base.
Am searching for info on how plants are responding to climate change and which plants are likely candidates for the near future based on tolerance to heat, drought, flood, sudden cold snaps, etc.
Searched for info on mayhaw and your site came up.
Our farm is on Facebook as Wrocklage Run Farm if anyone is interested.Thank you so much for this wonderful website.
It has been a continuous recourse and  wealth of information as I start in my first year of trying to build my edible landscape in my extremely vertical yard, and back woods in the mountains of western NC.love the site, great and inspiring info!
check this out for young minds or parents; http://www.insectlore.com/butterfly-garden/Hi John, I have been following your site since the beginning of the year, after I heard your interview on permaculture voices, and have really learned a lot from you.
I thought it tied in wonderfully to the concepts you’ve discussed about community, and your plans for an intentional community.
Thanks for the kind words!JohnGlad to find your Temperate Climate Permaculture site.
So, we’re re-building that soil by planting lots of daikon radishes, & also by digging up & hauling sods from the back of our lot to the front.
Otherwise we’re planting fruit trees, & will soon have chickens.Have you anything on the oil sands in Northern Albertahi how do I print photos and info from this siteHi John,  When I saw your post “We bought the farm” it struck a chord with me as we were recently in the process of trying to do the same thing but it did not materialize as we could not agree on price.
We are in northwest Ohio and have a farming background but I have been a plumber for the past 25 years, while gardening and raising chickens on our 3 acre property.We as a family have leaned towards the self sufficient life style for a long time but it wasn’t until this opportunity to possibly buy an organic farm that we really got fired up about it.
For now we will concentrate on learning as much as we can about it and hopefully be able to turn the small properties we now own into one of the sustainable food producing ecosystems we read about.I have been wondering what I can focus on, in life after plumbing, and now I believe I have found the answer in permaculture, at least as far as applying the principles to our families lifestyle.
Listening to Joel Salatin, Geoff Lawton and others, it makes so much good sense and I want to be a part of the solution to some of our societies problems rather than contributing to them.We would like to come up with a permaculture design for our 3 acre property.
Do you think it is necessary to do an entire design course before attempting to produce a plan for one’s property.
I’ll be interested in following your new farm adventure too.Thanks, MarkMark – I would highly recommend taking a Permaculture Design Certificate Course.
The PDC should give you some great tools for how to think about designing your place.
I do not think it is mandatory, but it is highly recommended.Welcome to the amazing world of Permaculture!Johnwell, I seem to come across this site while researching about tapping of pine trees to collect resins and this site has provide me with very useful information and very helpfulHello John: Thank you for discussing your methodology and list of resources to create a Native Plant list!
I found it helpful, even after 40 years of desert gardening.
Interestingly, and this was not part of our consideration, but eastern Tennessee is one of the few locations in the US that is having the least climate shifts.http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/images/science/USPrecipMaps-large.jpgThanks for the comment!JohnI want to thank you for sharing your research on Tennessee plants.
Nurse job thing, so the short cut is well appreciated since I live in TN also!Great website,Hi John,I was wondering if you have come across any good information sites on cold climate chinampas?
I have a large scale application on an Island in a  river near Riga…It would take interest from a large not informed permaculture community….I am presently taking a Geoff Lawton design course…but we haven’t got to far along with aquaculture…..Dear Sir,Thank you for e-mail please note I am interestd in red Ganoderma spawnCan you provideThanking youAnwer zaibpermaculture is a great method to improve soil quality, instead improve productivity by using natural resources and appropriate technology, this is the way to help farmer to reduce their cost and make agricultural production sustain.So very good to see a critical scientific mind in the field of permaculture.I’m glad to have stumbled across your Phytoaccumulator article (thought it left me hanging), and am looking forward to discovering much more through your writings and knowledge.There is so much beauty in this world and being a shutin your site brings me such warmth and beauty.
We have not done any courses yet, but are off to Santa Maria to see some property to get started on a better lifestyle.Do you have any reservation about PC in Azores.
Your opinion would be cherished.Great site, great information and great generosity of spirit!
We are just about to move into our 2 acre small(very)holding in NE Bulgaria and I hope to apply many permaculture basics/methods/ethic in raising livestock and growing our food and fodder crops.
Your site is a valuable source of information.
Kind RegardsHarrisonHi John, thanks for the great work you’ve put in to create this amazing site!
My first worry would be, the thickness of the top soil – how soon we may expect to strike rock.
Any straw (or similar) on the islands that you know of?Thank you for all the informative articles and information.
Time for some labor on this Saturday.Great site.
I to understand the solution hunger/poverty  & three quater of the world can be answered by implementing permacultural principles .
Permaculture is the a balance of nature.its my pleasure to get aquaintenance.
Most the problems affecting enviromental issues and lack of food that leads to poverty is contributed by us  our communities or society on poor farming systems.
Therefore , we require more information on new technogies to improve soil texture, enviromental conservation.
I do understand the solution for hunger/poverty  & three quater of the world can be answered by implementing permacultural principles .
Permaculture is the a balance of nature.its my pleasure to get aquaintenance.
Most the problems affecting enviromental issues and lack of food that leads to poverty is contributed by us  our communities or society on poor farming systems.
Therefore , we require more information on new technogies to improve soil texture, enviromental conservation.
I need your support.What a great site you put together John.
Another to start another food forest on 5 acres and your plant index it just what I needed for my climate.
We will be delivering it in a community garden and wanted input as to the most inprtant topic to include in this course.
marlenLove this site!
Thank you for all the hard work you put in for us readersWonderful and informative site.Thanks a lot for your efforts.I enjoyed your post about the effect of the chicken coop on the grass.
I also liked the plant identification, I often don’t get around to identify some common plants I see around and it was fun to see that even someone like you, with a lot of expertise, does the same “footwork” for knowledge!Excellent source of information, try to follow them all.
Hope to get some land around Tellico Plains, TN next year and apply this information.
I live in a very cold area, zone 4a and only have a 90-100 frost free growing season.Thank you for a great resource.
We are out of the country during your permaculture course however I would love to take the class in the future.Thanks for your work toward educating people about sustainable and regenerative farming practices.
I hope to learn a lot from your site!Love your site!
FacebookTwitterAbout this site…In my years of studying about Permaculture, I have often been a bit frustrated with the majority of the authors.
They are all living and writing and designing in the tropics and sub-tropics, or are doing amazing things in arid climates.
I have found bits and pieces of very good information but never a good central clearinghouse for this information.Permaculture is about design, and it is not about specific, cookie-cutter, one-size-fits-all solutions.
That is what this website is all about.
Applying Permaculture design principles where I live, or where I plan on living as soon as I get the chance!As Permaculture is about design, just about anything that deals with gardening, farming, homesteading, and self-sufficiency can be viewed through the lens of Permaculture.
You will find all that here on this site.The main goal I have with this site is to get information that I feel is important in one place for me and others to read and to reference.
I hope one day to incorporate more hands on material on this site, but for now I want to create as close to a single stop shop as possible for information on Temperate Climate Permaculture.Please follow along as I share as much as I can about Permaculture, gardening, farming, homesteading, and self-sufficiency.
This website is the product of a lot of research and some opinions.
I hope that you can walk away with at least one new piece of information that you can use to make your world a better place.
Occasional road trips took me past orange groves and pasture lands in Central Florida, but my view from the interstate highway was about as close as I ever got to modern farming.
However, living in the sub-tropics (even though in the suburbs) I was surrounded by the natural world.
We had three citrus trees in our backyard, and there were many summer days I would spend as long as I could without touching the ground eating only tangelos and peeing from high branches.In 1996 after graduating from art school, I moved to Kentucky.
I was now surrounded by farmland and farmers, many of whom I would call friends.
However, as I read into it, I realized the author was anything but a typical farmer.
He wrote about minimizing work through intelligent design of farming systems, all with using almost no chemicals, and still producing a superior (e.g.
The end results are stressed, unhappy cattle with questionable chemicals within meat and milk, farmers who are amateur industrial chemists and struggling to make ends meet, and land that is losing fertility every year and is basically barren and void of biodiversity.Joel Salatin’s way: Place the cattle in a much smaller field.
The chickens scratch through the cow patties and eat the bugs and worms (negating the need to use poisons to kill the parasites that would re-infect the cattle), they spread the manure around (negating the need for people to do the work), they fertilize the fields with their own droppings (negating the work and cost and chemicals needed to fertilize), and they create their own products (eggs and meat) with minimal extra expense or work from the farmer.
The end results are happy cattle with superior meat and milk products with minimal or no chemical additives, famers who make a profit due to extra product lines with minimal expenditure of time or money, and land that is gaining fertility and biodiversity.
Brilliant!This was my first exposure to alternative farming and food production.
While he didn’t use the term, Joel Salatin was practicing Permaculture.I continued to read as much as I could on the subject of alternative food production.
This led me to books on hobby farming, self-sufficiency, and home gardening.
My growing love of cooking dovetailed nicely with the growing options for superior tasting organic foods.
Gone were the days of hippy, tree-huggers and their worm filled “organic” foods that tasted worse than what you got in the grocery store but weren’t “filled with no chemicals from the Man, man!” Organic food was being produced scientifically by people who were outside the norm but were not abnormal.
And the food was better!I had seen a few book titles for Permaculture during this time, but the covers of the books looked a bit odd.
The basic premise was designing a forest of plants (trees, shrubs, vines, etc.)
that are useful to humans in a way that mimicked a natural forest.
It was a simple concept, but it was, and still is, revolutionary to me.From there I read the two textbooks on temperate climate forest gardening in North America, “Edible Forest Gardening” volumes I and II by Dave Jacke, then Gaia’s Garden by Toby Hemenway, and finally “Introduction to Permaculture” by the creator of Permaculture, Bill Mollison.I finally realized what Permaculture was not.
However regrettable, you will find many who treat Permaculture in this way.Permaculture is truly a scientific approach to land, plant, and animal management that treats the natural world with a sense of awe and respect.
The science of Permaculture has a lot of breadth and depth, but basically, I think it is how I expected God wanted us to treat the land back in the Garden of Eden.As you can see from my story above, most of my “experience” with Permaculture has been in the form of reading about it.
After working as a graphic designer and then going back to school for another eleven years to become a physician and then traveling with the Air Force for another seven years, I have had little time to do more than plant small gardens between studying, working, and moving.
(as a WWOOFer or Visitor)John Kitsteiner Hey, I like the new website!“However regrettable, you will find many who treat Permaculture in this way.”Exactly.
)I don’t want to spend thousands of dollars, then be required to spend time listening to people talk about how they’re communing with the “Earth Spirit”.
Toby Hemenway is another leading permie who doesn’t preach communal living and demonize profit, ditto do the Bullock Brothers on Orcas Island, WA.
Love the site John – bookmarked!Hello John Are you still living in Kentucky?I have visited Polyface farms several times now and Joel S is one of my food heroes.
Accordingly i have been developing and presenting a workshop on Fire, heating,cooking and related topics, as they represent  a critical life skill  not addressed in typical PDCregards, TomLike the site so far.
I wanted to comment on the “any chance of being mainstream” mentioned by Rechovot by saying there is no chance of being mainstream unless someone comes around with a magic wand and all of a sudden all lawns disappear and the land goes back to how it was.
The most we can hope for is that more people “see the light” and change their way of thinking.
I was lucky to have landed in a city (actually more like a not so big town) lot with more than half a dozen 100 year old oaks that doesn’t photograph well in Google Map.
My mission in life is to help the bumblebee and other wild bees flourish, how my lot is transforming (partly by me, mostly by itself) is secondary but one helps the other.
Birds are also a great help since somehow shrubs and plants are showing up on their own, and I suspect birds are the reason.
John, good job.Great site, and very useful resources for those of us in cooler areas.
We need all kinds of design to inform our ways of improving and sustaining our food sources.
I think the spiritual side has its place for some, as does the aspect of commerce – but we need more people to see the benefits of a permaculture approach to the environment.
Thanks for sharing what you have.John, Scottish Highlands.I really love your site John, I live here in Northern Utah and and am equally inspired with Permaculture.
If not, we will just get my bulldog of a PE after them, and there will not be much they can do about that except grant you a variance.Warm Regards,jayJay – Permies is a great site.
I don’t get on there as much as I would like, but it is a great resource and on-line community.Hello John,     I spent a lot of time on your old site, and it looks like I will be doing the same here.
I have you linked as a top reference on my site, and if I ever get any traffic maybe I’ll send you some.
I am with you all the way, and have the land to slowly implement permaculture now.
It isn’t “permanent culture” if you can’t survive, and permaculture is only sustainable way with out grubbing on the land like serfs.
Thanks for your site, Peace, TerryDo you know if this is still in the works, or if it has happened already?
I’d be interested in being put in contact with the USDA people organizing it as it could be helpful information for my group’s work with children and youth permaculture teacher trainings.
Thanks, Patty Parks-WassermanLove the new website–and all of your great reference material!
Regarding the PDC–the experience of taking a course is life changing.
JohnHi John, really like your site.
I too am interested in permaculture and want to apply it now in real life.
We bought some land west of Chicago (13 acre cornfield basically) and wish to transform it into a permaculture paradise.
This will give you a firm foundation to design and develop your land.Thanks for the info about the online course.
Perfect!Thanks John for such an excellent website on Temperate Climate Permaculture!
I have enjoyed many of the things you have presented, especially the trees and fungi series and yes, the photos are excellent!I spent about 5 years studying Permaculture literature before I was able to attend a 2 week PDC in 2004 along the Hood Canal in WA.
You know, it takes a village or tribe to wildcraft/harvest from a food forest, and that means all kinds of different folks.The PDC was an excellent way of connecting the dots of Permaculture for me, plus since it was given in the bioregion that I was currently farming in, it helped me to create a reference of sorts for guild plantings for my land even during the course.
I would advise you to attend a course that will reflect the types of plants that are growing in your chosen land region.Fast forward almost 10 years and I find myself in a completely different bioregion, North Central Washington about 20 miles from the Canadian border, in fact it is -3 degrees F outside right now!
I was fortunate to take another PDC this past August, here in this bioregion, it was very valuable because the instructors emphasized  the trees and plants which live around here.
It was also valuable because I could compare and contrast the two courses and I can see I have certainly come a long way since my first PDC in 2004!So, by all means, take a PDC when you are able to and my advice is to take more than one (if you are able to manage it, many instructors will take work trades in lieu of $$), each one will give you another way of seeing Permaculture.Again, thank you for your excellent website, I have really enjoyed it and learned a lot!Joined today and am enthused.
Any thoughts on this multipurpose shrub?So, thanks for creating this resource, and I’ll be digging in.Colin,Zone 5a-Maine, a region forecast to not croak from moderate climate change.Hello John,Beautiful new site, I’ve just joined and looking forward to going through the whole website.
Up in Wisconsin, zone 4b and am a recent grad of Geoff Lawton’s first online PDC.
So looking forward to planting a perennial veggie garden (a la Paradise Lot) and already have found good info in your content towards that end.
Cheers!I’m new to your site, and I am just getting to know more about permaculture, but I am having the opposite problem to you so far.
Bill Mollison started in Melbourne, and there are many great permaculture farms and courses over here, but they are all in the south.
However, it never snows where I am, and all the info about seasonal gardening, and how to manage frosts etc is pointless.
I need the info on gardening in a hot climate, but it’s hard to find — perhaps we should pool our resources so we can all see the whole picture!I wish I had a farm, not a big one, just a little one…Hi John.
I”m from Poland.
A couple of years ago we bought with the housband a land at the lakes and the forests, but in the middle of the village.
Last year we’ve bought there a little house and started to make a forest garden, the place for the animals, birds, vegetables and flowers.
I was looking for the informations about the permacultural gardens in the net and found You blog and the site.
Above all, they must be effective because many Greeks still rely heavily on these plots for subsistence as well as income.At home in North Florida, we are constantly seeking to incorporate good permaculture practices into our own small horse farm for greater efficiencies and effectiveness.
Nice to see someone sharing a passion so constructively–cheers.Very nice website.
This page in particular on your site says a lot about how I have felt about farming, gardening and learning something more sustainable like permaculture.So John, you encouraged folks to come and visit you.
We’re boning up on permaculture and what that entails with the intent of purchasing land and doing that to it.
Where do you live, and can we come visit you?Really nice site.
Thanks for all the information from cold Minnesota.Hi John, I recently found your website from a Google search whilst doing my online PDC with Geoff Lawton in 2013.
It has stuck with me since then and I now find myself setting up my own website for St George town community here in south west Queensland, Australia.
It is my intension to use my website as a permaculture resource, to help spread the word and yes to take away the hippy aspect people have about sustainability etc.
I love your format and so will set my site up along a similar line, hopefully allowing some form of interaction /forum for my community so that we can share ideas and eventually set up a permaculture group in St George.
You have a great way of writing and I would like people to visit your site for more info, if this is a problem can you let me know and I will not link.
Regards SheilaI just found your website.
Rocks, bad soil, more rocks.
Really hard on the gardeners though.
But actually there is very little about growing on land like this, or zones 5 and less.
I do get lots of rain (and snow) but when your land is more like a gravel pit than Eden, steps need to be taken to keep that water on the land.I agree with the aspect that many of you have mentioned, that sometimes the ‘spiritual’ gets in the way of the true understanding of nature.
Would love to meet and exchange notes.I was utilizing your website, yet again, in my plant research and got to thinking that I should let you know how much I appreciate it!
I love your articles, your research, your time volunteered to spread all this information with the world, and I do appreciate your scientific viewpoint.
Really, I just have a lot of love and want to preserve this planet and know that trying to invent new technology while continuing this lifestyle will get us nowhere.
Calling people who believe that a dirty hippie is so degrading.
I just feel really sad that I read that here.Hi john-A film that I think you will be very interested to see is called Back to Eden, and can be found at http://www.backtoedenfilm.com/index.html   You can see it for free at the very bottom of the page.The film will take an hour and forty-five minutes or so of your life but is so worth it.
Not exactly on permaculture, but this guy figured a lot out on his own and his information is really useful for anyone trying to grow food, no matter how they do it.Best-PaulaHello!
Just stumbled on your website & was very happy to find it.
My dream is to build a sustainable home – something along the lines of an Earthship – but my boyfriend & I plan to move to Washington, and I’m sure the rain & clouds will make it a bit more tricky.
It’s good to see a site devoted to permaculture in temperate zones.
As the climate is extreme, almost desert like in certain areas and the soil changes drastically literally from one space to another, I have had the challenge of not only determining what will grow, but why/how.
Things that I would never have considered to be issues have proven themselves excessive when looking at gardening there such as burnt plants, wind withered plants, plants that had too much rain that they mildewed at the roots due to the soil and lack of drainage when it was parched, even not having pollinators after a certain time period due to it being too dry.
I have begun working with principles of permaculture, only I didn’t realize it was this, I was thinking about how to infuse more of a natural environment that would sustain a longer grown period and had come across some articles about how they are changing the landscape within desert regions in Africa.
ShalomGreetings from the temperate area of the San Juan Islands of North/West Washington State where I live and garden in the shadow of the Olympic rain forest.¿Necesita un préstamo urgente?
So where can we get seeds for these plants?Para introducir correctamente mí mismo, soy el Sr. Michael Benson un prestamista privado, i dar préstamos a tipo de interés del 3%, esto una oportunidad financiera.
………………Periodo de préstamo …………….Ocupación……………..Ingreso mensual ……………En reconocimiento a estos detalles, le enviaremos nuestro acuerdo con el calendario de pagos, y si está de acuerdo con los Términos y Condiciones, se pone de pie para obtener su préstamo dentro de 24 horas, dependiendo de la gravedad y urgencia, y la confianza.Estoy a la espera de su pronta respuesta.AtentamenteMichael BensonThis site will be so helpful, thanks so much!
It reignited my desire (from years and years ago, after reading Bill Mollison’s big book stemming from his life in the tropics) to figure out how to do this in Missouri.
It is not as alternative as the title suggests, and is full of temperate climate information for permaculture people.Click here to cancel reply.FacebookTwitter
FacebookTwitterNOTE: We only sell locally from our farm.
A view of our farm in Bulls Gap, TNQuality food is hard to find.
I am not just referring to food that tastes good, nor am I just referring to “health” food.
I am referring to food that is holistically beneficial for people and the land.
In an ideal world, our food should be:This is a lofty goal, but I personally believe we can do this.
And this is exactly what we are doing on our farm.
Ultimately, our goal is to raise food that we would want to eat.Our farm is located within an easy day’s drive of a large portion of the eastern U.S.1.
LOCAL We raise our animals on our farm in the north end of Greene County in the small town of Bulls Gap, TN, population 739.
Our chickens and turkeys are processed on site, and our buyers pick up their birds from our freezers.
TASTY AND NUTRIENT DENSEChickens and TurkeysOur chickens and turkeys eat a number of food items each day.
When chickens and turkeys eat a wide variety of food, like they were designed to do, and they eat food that is full of healthy proteins, carbohydrates, fats, vitamins, minerals, and phytonutrients, then their meat is significantly more nutrient dense than what you could ever find in a factory farm.The result of this nutrient density is a superior tasting meat and eggs.
Spring and Summer brings more eggs and deeper-colored yolks.Older people will often remark how our chicken and turkey tastes how they remember it tasting when they grew up on a farm as a child.
I believe a significant factor for the obesity epidemic in the U.S. is that our food is nutrient poor.
When our food is nutrient dense, our bodies don’t crave more calories, and we feel full sooner.
Sheep are herbivores, and they were never designed to eat large amounts of grains.
I believe it is a combination of the breed and the grass-feeding that gives them a fantastic lamb flavor without too much gaminess that causes some people not to like lamb.
And I have personally eaten lamb around the world.We raise Katahdin Hair Sheep at our family farm.PorkWe are slowly growing our herd of heritage breed pigs including a wide variety of genetics from around the world.
Corn made fat is watery and lacks flavor.
Pork is not supposed to be bland.
Not only does this give them increased nutrition (see above), but it allows them to scratch and peck and root in the grass and soil, hunt insects and worms and grubs, bask in the sun or sit in the shade as they like.
We also need to be forthright: we are raising these animals for food.
But that doesn’t mean a food animal has to live in poor conditions.
We can ensure that our animals are treated with respect through their entire life.Free-Range Chickens are NOT the same as Pasture-Raised ChickensNOTE: PASTURE-RAISED CHICKENS ARE NOT THE SAME AS FREE-RANGE CHICKENS!
The door may be open for only five minutes and the farm still qualifies as “free-range.” Apart from the “open door,” no other criteria such as environmental quality, number of birds, or space per bird, are included in the term “free-range.” A government official said: “Places I’ve visited may have just a gravel yard with no alfalfa or other vegetation.”There are lots of wild places on the farm.5.
INCREASE BIODIVERSITY By not using any synthetic chemicals on our pastures and forests, we are allowing natural ecosystems the chance to recover.
We are using a whole farm management system that will not only preserve the species currently on the farm, but will increase the number of species living on our farm.
In less than 2 years on our farm, we are already seeing a return of dung beetles, spiders, praying mantises, ladybugs, frogs, and salamanders!Example of how we are using Holistic Management to regenerate the Bauernhof!6.
HEALING FOR THE ENVIRONMENT By working with natural systems and patterns, instead of against them, we can push the recovery process into a regenerative process.
Our farm will produce cleaner air, water, and soil while raising nutrient dense, humane, and delicious food.
PREVIOUS COURSESIntroduction to Permaculture at the Bauernhof Kitsteiner17 June 2017 (Saturday)John Kitsteiner will be teaching a 1-day course at their family farm, the Bauernhof Kitsteiner.
This course will be designed for the person who knows little to nothing about Permaculture.
The first half of the course will be lecture based, and the second half of the course will be a guided tour of the Bauernhof where Permaculture design is being put in to practice.Course Concluded!
Risk Free Ranching – Starting from Scratch25-26 September 2015 (Friday and Saturday)Grazing expert Greg Judy will be teaching a 2-day course on how to make a living from the land by grazing cattle, even if you don’t own any land!
This course will be designed for the absolute beginner, although experienced graziers with their own land will undoubtedly learn a lot from Greg’s experience.
Greg will show how we can revitalize hayed out, scruffy, weedy pastures, and turn them into highly productive grazing landscapes that grows both green grass and greenbacks!Course Concluded!
I am unable to be apart of this course .I hope there is a video course available for people who are not able to attend these type of events?Thank youRexI would like to know if carnivorous snails are safe to use in amgarden to get rid of slugs, have tryed many waysnto get rid of them but have so many that l read that carnivorous snails did a good job of getting rid of plant eating slugs and snails but want to know if they can become a problem ??
Being that we are Permaculturists and not yet certified “organic”, it is probably more accurate to say we offer a World Wide Opportunity on a Permaculture Farm!Please go to our WWOOF USA Profile Page to sign up!The Bauernhof!The Bauernhof Kitsteiner is the 96-acre (38 hectare) farm of John Kitsteiner (creator and author of this site), his wife Wendi and their four children ages 2-7.
Located in the rolling hills and low mountains of the Ridge-and-Valley Province of eastern Tennessee, along the western edge of the Appalachians bordering the Blue Ridge Mountains, this farm is situated in what used to be the Oak-Chestnut Forest of eastern North America, but after the loss of the American Chestnut, these areas have shifted into an Oak-Hickory-Pine forest system.
Approximately 60 acres are woods and 40 acres are pasture.The forest edge.The Kitsteiners moved to this farm in May of 2015 so this is an opportunity to see Permaculture from the ground up.
In the spring they will be raising Salatin-style broilers and working on their garden.
As summer approaches, work will begin on their forest garden.
One bedroom is for family and friends who come to the farm as guests, and the other room would be for WWOOFers.
It is a small room (with the best view on the farm!)
WIFI is provided in the apartment.There are lots of wild places on the farm.Bluebird eggs!Pawpaw tree!All meals will be served in the main house.
Dinner will be cooked by Wendi or Grandma, and since we are feeding 9 people every night, picky eaters need not apply!
If you like to cook, we’d love to have you help with a dinner now and then.Our farm is located within an easy day’s drive of a large portion of the eastern U.S.We are located just over 1 hour from Gatlinburg, Pigeon Forge, and Knoxville which all have a tremendous amount of things to do – culturally and agriculturally.
In addition, John is very familiar with educating and very willing to engage WWOOFers in as much education and learning opportunities as their brains desire.This farm is in a rural area so without a vehicle, you won’t be able to venture very far from the farm.This is the life!A note from John and Wendi:Of utmost importance to us is the safety of our children.
While our children do not run our house, they are an integral part of our community, and we need to know that they are safe and secure with any visitors that come to the farm.
There will be strict rules in place in order to protect them at all times, but we hope they get to know you and learn about new people.
If you don’t like children, this is NOT the farm for you as we try to include them in much of what we do.We are a strong Christian family who value (1) Faith, (2) Family, and then (3) Farming.
We have lived all over the USA and the world (including Turkey and the Azores, Portugal) and have a great appreciation for people of different faiths and cultures.
No smoking, bad language, or drunkenness permitted.We ask that anyone who wants to come work and live with us come with (1) a good attitude, (2) a willingness to help share the load of chores on the farm, and (3) a willingness to learn.
A good sense of humor is also an asset!If our farm seems like a good fit for you, please contact us with a few paragraphs telling us about yourself and why you think our farm and you would work well together.Please go to our WWOOF USA Profile Page to sign up!Extremely remarkable and with no doubt the photos speak of the great and dedicated farmer behind them.You are most definitely “living the dream”!!
 (Image credit: Cullen Pope)Angelo Eliades is presenter, trainer and writer in the areas of sustainable gardening and Permaculture.
He is a passionate forest gardening advocate, and has a thriving demonstration Permaculture food forest garden in Melbourne’s inner northern suburbs which he regularly opens to the public.
His garden won the Darebin Sustainability Award – House & Garden category in 2013, and was featured in the prestigious Open Gardens Australia event in 2014 and 2015.With over a decade and a half of experience in organic gardening, his specialty is designing and building food forests – sustainable intensive food production systems which utilize ecologically-based design principles for maximum productivity, minimum work and natural pest and weed control.As qualified workplace trainer and former technical writer in the corporate world, Angelo writes training materials and runs workshops for local governments, community groups and other organisations.
Being actively involved in the gardening industry, Angelo works part-time as a horticulturist in a large retail garden nursery as their permaculture and produce gardening specialist.
He also works for a sustainable gardening not-for-profit organisation as the editor of their garden industry newsletter, and as a presenter developing training materials for gardening professionals.In his work as an urban agriculture pioneer, Angelo designed and built Melbourne’s first demonstration backyard food forest garden in 2009, which achieved the production equivalent of over 14 tonnes per acre, far exceeding the production of rural farms many times over.
His work is featured in the documentary film “Fair Food” and in the “Urban Permaculture” DVD by world leading Permaculture designer Geoff Lawton.
Angelo Eliades is also a contributing author of the book “Fair Food: Stories from a Movement Changing the World” published in 2015 by Queensland University Press.
When he is not consulting, teaching, working in the retail garden nursery industry, writing magazine articles or enjoying time in his own garden, he supports community gardening projects as a technical advisor, and runs the educational sustainable gardening website Deep Green Permaculture Permaculture – https://deepgreenpermaculture.com/ – an international information resource with worldwide readership which has reached millions of people to date!
Contact Details:If you have any comments, queries, feedback or requests for articles, please feel free to contact us at deep_green@optusnet.com.au Special Thanks:This site was inspired by my Permaculture teachers, Bill Mollison, Geoff Lawton and Greg Knibbs.
They really demonstrated what a difference one person’s work can make in the world.Special thanks to Merian Ellis, the journalist who interviewed me about my garden project, and got me started in collating all the material to put this site together.
Advertising?Why is there advertising on this site?This site is created in wordpress.com, a free blog service which has been adapted to a web site format with some creative tinkering!
The provider has the right to put any advertising they wish on the site, but by volunteering for AdWords advertising, there is some control over the advertising content – the only advertising category selected for this site is "Green" to try keep with the theme of the site, so supposedly only advertising which fits this character should appear here.Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email.
 Many people have never heard of it, and even those practicing it often have trouble defining it!
So what exactly is Permaculture?The easiest way to think of it is as ‘ecological gardening’, but such a brief description doesn’t really capture the essence of it, so here’s a more formal definition: Permaculture is a holistic design system that emulates systems that exist in Nature to create sustainable human settlements and food production systems which integrate harmoniously with the natural environment.
"Permaculture is a movement concerned with sustainable, environmentally sound land use and the building of stable communities, through the harmonious interrelationship of humans, plants, animals and the Earth.The focus of Permaculture design is on the relationship between all the individual elements and their placement in the landscape, to form stable, productive communities that replicate the synergy and efficiency of natural ecosystems, rather than the individual elements themselves.Permaculture design is applicable to both urban and rural environments, and encompasses all ranges of scale, from an apartment balcony to a large-scale farm or village.Being a design framework, Permaculture is concerned with much more than just the design of ecologically harmonious landscapes that produce food.
As a system of design, it can encompass many different disciplines, which provide the techniques and methods to achieve the design goals.…Permaculture can incorporate the techniques of organic gardening, biodynamic gardening, no-dig gardening, composting and a myriad of other sustainable gardening practices.Therefore, Permaculture can incorporate the techniques of organic gardening, biodynamic gardening, no-dig gardening, composting and a myriad of other sustainable gardening practices.
It can also use techniques of energy-efficient building design, water harvesting, waste water treatment and recycling for example.Permaculture is a growing and evolving design system and has expanded to include economic and social systems that support stable communities, such as credit co-ops, Local Exchange Trading Systems (LETS) and eco-villages.Two terms which come close to defining Permaculture, as suggested by ATTRA (The US National Sustainable Agriculture Information Service) are "ecological engineering" or “cultivated ecology".So, in a nutshell, that’s what Permaculture is!
I don’t know If I said it already but …Excellent site, keep up the good work.
I read a lot of blogs on a daily basis and for the most part, people lack substance but, I just wanted to make a quick comment to say I’m glad I found your blog.
Thanks, 🙂 A definite great read..Jim BeanLikeLikeFantastic site.You’ve done a great job on the garden, and your knowledge is obvious,Thanks for sharing this information.Very inspiring.LikeLikeThanks guys, appreciate to positive feedback!LikeLikeI hope to visit you folks in 9 or so days with the NERPG mob.
david hicks……..LikeLikeLooking forward to the visit, glad to take you all through the garden and explain how it all works!LikeLikeThanks so much for your open garden yesterday, I learnt so much in such a short time…very inspirational and thank you too for all the plants…very unexpected and welcome gifts……am now enjoying your website, which is going to be such a help in getting our garden established……LikeLikeThanks so much for showing us through your garden this afternoon.
What a fantastic inspiration – am off to explore the rest of your site now!LikeLikeYou’re welcome!LikeLikeJust discovered your site.. it is wonderful!LikeLikevery interested in what your doing and would like to subscribe to your newsletter ,thankyou DaveLikeLikeHi Dave, Thanks!
To subscribe, you can either put a tick in the ‘Subscribe by email to this site’ box at the bottom of the page when you type in your comment, or receive update notifications via RSS by clicking on the ‘Entries (RSS)’ link at the very bottom of the pageRegardsLikeLikeThanks for the great site and info!LikeLikeGreat site…  Thanks for sharing…LikeLikeFirst time here, very exciting.I have a peach tree.
I look forward to hearing from you.Best to all and happy growing.Dianne MLikeLikeHi Diane,Unfortunately, due to climate here in Melbourne, peach and nectarine trees do need seasonal spraying of fungicide, and organic gardeneres use eithe Lime Sulphur or the copper based Bordeaux mixture.Both are OK, I’ve used Lime Sulphur before, it smells terrible but it does work well.
I’ve seen organic gardening workshops that show people how to make this up at home.
RegardsLikeLikeHi, what a lovely, informative site.
We are hoping to visit your garden tomorrow for permaculture day.
There’s nothing more satisfying than insiring people to make a difference.
You also mentioned a tour of your garden later this month.
thanks again KerrieLikeLikeHi Kerrie,I’ve posted the details of our next garden tour under Upcoming Events on the website, I’ve listed it here: https://deepgreenpermaculture.com/2011/05/17/backyard-urban-food-forest-tour/See you there!LikeLikeYou are such an inspiration!
Please keep writing!LikeLikeThanks for the wonderful information here, an inspirationLikeLikeGreat teaching at the permaculture convergence this weekendLikeLikeThanks, glad you enjoyed my presentation!LikeLikeI rarely comment on websites, but this has been amazing.
I’m setting up my first garden, a courtyard 8m x 5m, following permaculture principles and the extra proviso that every plant will be “scented, edible, or both”.
Thank you so much for putting the work into not only creating your garden, but into the blog design and clear explanations that make it possible for the rest of us to follow suit.
You’ve been a great help!LikeLikeThank you very much for information on your site.
We started with a project for people living with disability in South Africa & companion planting and organic is still in its baby phase this side, so I know that I will spend a lot of time on your site.
Yee haw!LikeLikeyou are surely the best site about permaculture i´ve ever seen.thank you.LikeLikevery interesting this site about permaculture.I want to learning every think about this kind of life.
As one famous inventor said “comprehend and copy nature”.
A word of caution, “beware of over designing”.
The forest is made by nature via a poo and forget scheme by birds and other small animals.Man is far better.
JulianLikeLikeI have only just got interested in Permaculture and find that your site has a lot of useful and interesting information.
This will surely be useful in my involvement in a self sustaining community in Tamil Nadu, India.LikeLikeHi.
Would there be any possibility to visit your community?
I am a designer and artist who create play and artistic projects as art therapy for kids and patients.
I am a designer who loves natural alternative medicine and food.
Willing to start my garden!!
somewhere in this world) I plan to personally get in touch with you for advice on Deep Green Permaculture and sustainable organic gardening for self-sufficient people.
Philip.LikeLikeHi Philip,Deep Green Permaculture is my website, Geoff Lawton is my teacher, his websites are http://www.geofflawton.com and http://permaculturenews.org/Yes, Geoff Lawton’s work is brilliant and totally inspiring!RegardsAngeloLikeLikeHi Angelo, I have found your blog so inspirational.
I live in central France (not mediterranean), please keep us updated with your garden and other projects.
I have just made a hot compost heap today!All the best, please put something on youtube every month, or just keep posting blogs.How would your garden look like in our climate I wonder?
Thank you.LikeLikeHello Angelo, your wonderful site and easy to follow instructions inspired me to build a hot compost 8 days ago, I was so excited to feel the heat growing daily, and have started turning it.
Many thanks for the fabulous information, MicheleLikeLikegreat site.
Keep up the hard work this is serving as my main goto source now after reading this site almost start to finish.
Love the projects and all the hard work you have done, thanks for sharing.LikeLikeHi, I am so glad to see that at least some people are into permaculture which is much older than mentioned here.
So keep up the good work while I continue to try and influence Councils and landscapers to really investigate the benefits of biodiversified permaculture and safe/suitable trees for varying areas.
Rosemary Courtier (nee Horton)   rosejhorton@gmail.comLikeLikeHi Angelo, Your site just keeps getting better.
I visited your garden a while back with Pete the Permie and found your garden to be one of the most inspirational I have ever seen.
(I still have to drop the photos and audio over to you) Mine is not nearly as good, but then I am really a now and again gardener (when time, weather and health allow) and my biggest issue is Morning Glory [Monster].
The birds are winning the fruit harvesting race and the possums are eating all my passionfruit leaves and shoots.
This year I hope to finally complete my star picket and wire mesh fruit tree cage (two years in the building) and place a chook house inside it for a few bantams with fox protection.
We are to work and replicate your permaculture thoughts in our farm in sogod, Cebu, Philippines.
Getting it done now on our farm.LikeLikeGreat Work!!
